                          13
               NEUR AL NET WORKS




           Deep learning algorithms are based on
           building a network of connected compu-
          tational elements. The fundamental unit of
       such networks is a small bundle of computation
called an artificial neuron, though it’s often referred to
simply as a neuron. The artificial neuron was inspired
by human neurons, which are the nerve cells that
make up our brain and central nervous system and
are largely responsible for our cognitive abilities.
    In this chapter, we see what artificial neurons look like and how to
arrange them into networks. We then group them into layers, which create
deep learning networks. We also look at various ways to configure the out-
puts of these artificial neurons so that they produce the most useful results.
      Real Neurons
                     In biology, the term neuron is applied to a wide variety of complex cells
                     distributed throughout every human body. These cells all have similar
                     structure and behavior, but they’re specialized for many different tasks.
                     Neurons are sophisticated pieces of biology that use a mix of chemistry,
                     physics, electricity, timing, proximity, and other means to perform their
                     behaviors and communicate with one another (Julien 2011; Khanna 2018;
                     Lodish et al. 2000; Purves et al. 2001). A highly simplified sketch of a neu-
                     ron is shown in Figure 13-1.


                                                        Axon




      Nucleus
                                    Cell body                               Synaptic
                                                                            terminals
Dendrite




Figure 13-1: A sketch of a highly simplified biological neuron (in red) with a few major structures identified.
This neuron’s outputs are communicated to another neuron (in blue), only partially shown (adapted from
Wikipedia 2020b).

                          Neurons are information processing machines. One type of informa-
                     tion arrives in the form of chemicals called neurotransmitters that temporar-
                     ily bind, or attach, onto receptor sites located on the neuron (Goldberg 2015).
                     Let’s sketch out what happens next in the broadest possible terms.
                          The chemicals that bind to the receptor sites cause electrical signals
                     to travel into the body of the neuron. Each of these signals can be either
                     positive or negative. All of the electrical signals arriving at the neuron’s
                     body over a short interval of time are added together and then compared
                     to a threshold. If the total exceeds that threshold, a new signal is sent along
                     the axon to another part of the neuron, causing specific amounts of neu-
                     rotransmitters to be released into the environment. These molecules then
                     bind with other neurons, and the process repeats.
                          In this way, information is propagated and modified as it flows through
                     the densely connected network of neurons in the brain and central nervous
                     system. If two neurons are physically close enough to each other that one


314     Chapter 13
        can receive the neurotransmitters released by the other, we say that the neu-
        rons are connected, even though they may not be actually touching. There is
        some evidence that the particular pattern of connections between neurons
        is as essential to cognition and identity as the neurons themselves (Sporns,
        Tononi, and Kötter 2005; Seung 2013). A map of an individual’s neuronal
        connections is called their connectome. Connectomes are as unique as finger-
        prints or iris patterns.
             Although real neurons and their surrounding environment are tre-
        mendously complex and subtle, the basic mechanism described here has an
        appealing elegance. Responding to this, some scientists have attempted to
        emulate or duplicate the brain by creating enormous numbers of simplified
        neurons and their environment, in hardware or software, hoping that inter-
        esting behavior will emerge (Furber 2012; Timmer 2014). So far, this has
        not delivered results that most people would call intelligence.
             But we can connect up simplified neurons in specific ways to produce
        great results on a wide range of problems. Those are the types of structures
        that will be our focus in this chapter, and the rest of this book.


Artificial Neurons
        The “neurons” we use in machine learning are inspired by real neurons
        in the same way that a stick figure drawing is inspired by a human body.
        There’s a resemblance, but only in the most general sense. Almost all of the
        details are lost along the way, and we’re left with something that’s more of a
        reminder of the original, rather than even a simplified copy.
             This has led to some confusion, particularly in the popular press, where
        “neural network” is sometimes used as a synonym for “electronic brain,” and
        from there, it’s only a short step to general intelligence, consciousness, emo-
        tions, and perhaps world domination and the elimination of human life. In
        reality, the neurons we use are so abstracted and simplified from real neu-
        rons that many people prefer instead to call them by the more generic name
        of units. But for better or worse, the word neuron, the phrase neural net, and
        all the related language are apparently here to stay, so we use them in this
        book as well.

        The Perceptron
        The history of artificial neurons may be said to begin in 1943, with the
        publication of a paper that presented a massively simplified abstraction
        of a neuron’s basic functions in mathematical form, and described how
        multiple instances of this object could be connected into a network, or net.
        The big contribution of this paper was that it proved mathematically that
        such a network could implement any idea expressed in the language of
        mathematical logic (McCulloch and Pitts 1943). Since mathematical logic
        is the basis of machine calculation, that means neurons could perform
        mathematics. This was a big deal, because it provided a bridge between the
        fields of math, logic, computing, and neurobiology.


                                                                      Neural Networks   315
                       Building on that insight, in 1957 the perceptron was proposed as a simpli-
                   fied mathematical model of a neuron (Rosenblatt 1962). Figure 13-2 is a
                   block diagram of a single perceptron with four inputs.

                                 Weight 1



                   Input 1


                                 Weight 2



                   Input 2

                                                                             If > 0 then 1
                                 Weight 3                                    else –1



                   Input 3


                                 Weight 4



                   Input 4


                   Figure 13-2: A four-input perceptron

                         Every input to a perceptron is represented by a single floating-point
                   number. Each input is multiplied by a corresponding floating-point num-
                   ber called a weight. The results of these multiplications are all added
                   together. Finally, we compare the result to a threshold value. If the result
                   of the summation is greater than 0, the perceptron produces an output of
                   +1, otherwise it’s −1 (in some versions, the outputs are 1 and 0, rather
                   than +1 and −1).
                         Though the perceptron is a vastly simplified version of a real neuron,
                   it’s proven to be a terrific building block for deep learning systems.
                         The history of the perceptron is an interesting part of the culture of
                   machine learning, so let’s look at just a couple of its key events; more com-
                   plete versions may be found online (Estebon 1997; Wikipedia 2020a).
                         After the principles of the perceptron had been verified in software, a
                   perceptron-based computer was built at Cornell University in 1958. It was
                   a rack of wire-wrapped boards the size of a refrigerator, called the Mark

316   Chapter 13
I Perceptron (Wikipedia 2020c). The device was built to process images,
using a grid of 400 photocells that could digitize an image at a resolution of
20 by 20 pixels (the word pixel hadn’t yet been coined). The weight applied
to each input of the perceptron was set by turning a knob that controlled
an electrical component called a potentiometer. To automate the learning
process, electric motors were attached to the potentiometers so the device
could literally turn its own knobs to adjust its weights and thereby change
its calculations, and thus its output. The theory guaranteed that, with the
right data, the system could learn to separate two different classes of inputs
that could be split with a straight line.
     Unfortunately, not many interesting problems involve sets of data that are
separated by a straight line, and it proved hard to generalize the technique to
more complicated arrangements of data. After a few years of stalled progress,
a book proved that the original perceptron technique was fundamentally
limited (Minsky and Papert 1969). It showed that the lack of progress wasn’t
due to a lack of imagination, but the result of theoretical limits built into
the structure of a perceptron. Most interesting problems, and even some
very simple ones, were provably beyond the ability of a perceptron to solve.
     This result seemed to signal the end of perceptrons for many people,
and a popular consensus formed that the perceptron approach was a dead
end. Enthusiasm, interest, and funding all dried up, and most people
directed their research to other problems. This period, which lasted
roughly between the 1970s and 1990s, was called the AI winter.
     But despite a widespread interpretation that the perceptron book had
closed the door on perceptrons in general, in fact it had only shown the
limitations of how they’d been used up to that time. Some people thought
that writing off the whole idea was an overreaction and that perhaps the
perceptron could still be a useful tool if applied in a different way. It took
roughly a decade and a half, but this point of view eventually bore fruit
when researchers combined perceptrons into larger structures and showed
how to train them (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams 1986). These combi-
nations easily surpassed the limitations of any single unit. A series of papers
then showed that careful arrangements of multiple perceptrons, beefed up
with a few minor changes, could solve complex and interesting problems.
     This discovery rekindled interest in the field, and soon research with
perceptrons became a hot topic once again, producing a steady stream of
interesting results that have led to the deep learning systems we use today.
Perceptrons remain a core component of many modern deep learning
systems.

Modern Artificial Neurons
The neurons we use in modern neural networks are only slightly general-
ized from the original perceptrons. There are two changes: one at the
input, and one at the output. These modified structures are still sometimes
called perceptrons, but there’s rarely any confusion because the new ver-
sions are used almost exclusively. More commonly, they’re just called neu-
rons. Let’s look at these two changes.


                                                              Neural Networks   317
                       The first change to the perceptron of Figure 13-2 is to provide each
                   neuron with one more input, which we call the bias. This is a number that
                   doesn’t come from the output of a previous neuron. Instead, it’s a number
                   that’s directly added into the sum of all the weighted inputs. Every neuron
                   has its own bias. Figure 13-3 shows our original perceptron, but with the
                   bias term included.

                                 Weight 1



                   Input 1


                                 Weight 2



                   Input 2

                                                                                     If > 0 then 1
                                 Weight 3                                            else –1



                   Input 3


                                 Weight 4



                   Input 4                                       Bias


                   Figure 13-3: The perceptron of Figure 13-2, but now with a bias term

                        Our second change to the perceptron of Figure 13-2 is at the output.
                   The perceptron in that figure tests the sum against a threshold of 0, and
                   then produces either a −1 or 1 (or 0 or 1). We generalize this by replacing the
                   testing step with a mathematical function that takes the sum (including the
                   bias) as input and returns a new floating-point value as output. Because the
                   output of a real neuron is called its activation, we call this f­ unction that calcu-
                   lates the artificial neuron’s output the activation function. The little test shown
                   in Figure 13-2 is an activation function, but one that’s rarely used anymore.
                   Later in this chapter we’ll survey a variety of activation functions that have
                   proved to be popular and useful in practice.




318   Chapter 13
Drawing the Neurons
       Let’s identify a convention that’s used by most drawings of artificial
       neurons. In Figure 13-3 we showed the weights explicitly, and we also
       included the multiplication steps to show how the weights multiply the
       inputs. This takes a lot of room on the page. When we draw diagrams
       with a lot of neurons, all of these details can make for a cluttered and
       dense figure. So instead, in virtually all neural network diagrams, the
       weights and their multiplications are implied.
           This is important, and bears repeating: in neural network diagrams,
       the weights, and the steps where they multiply the inputs, are not drawn.
       Instead, we’re supposed to know that they are there and mentally include
       them in the diagram. If we show the weights at all, we typically label the
       lines from the inputs with the name of the weight. Figure 13-4 shows
       Figure 13-3 drawn in this style.

       Input 1



                        Weight 1


       Input 2
                    Weight 2




                     Weight 3
       Input 3


                        Weight 4




       Input 4                           Bias

       Figure 13-4: A neuron is often drawn with the weights on the arrows.

             In Figure 13-4, we also changed the threshold test at the end to a
       little picture. This is a drawing of a function called a step, and it’s meant
       to give us a visual reminder that any activation function can go into that
       spot. Basically, a number goes into that step, and a new number comes out,
       ­determined by whichever function we choose for the job.




                                                                              Neural Networks   319
                        We usually simplify things again. This time we omit the bias by pre-
                   tending it’s one of the inputs. This not only makes the diagram simpler,
                   but it makes the math simpler as well, which, in this case, also leads to
                   more efficient algorithms. This simplification is called the bias trick (the
                   word trick comes from mathematics, where it’s a complimentary term some-
                   times used for a clever simplification of a problem). Rather than change
                   the value of the bias, we set the bias to always be 1, and change the weight
                   applied to it before it gets summed up with the other inputs. Figure 13-5
                   shows this change in labeling. Though the bias term is always 1 and only
                   its weight can change, we usually ignore the distinction and just talk about
                   the value of the bias.

                   Input 1




                                         Weight 1
                   Input 2

                                    Weight 2


                   Input 3        Weight 3


                                    Weight 4

                   Input 4
                                         Weight 5




                   Bias = 1.0

                   Figure 13-5: The bias trick in action. Rather than show the bias term explicitly, as in
                   Figure 13-4, we pretend it’s another input with its own weight.

                        We want our artificial neuron diagrams to be as simple as possible
                   because when we start building up networks we’ll be showing lots of neurons
                   at once, so most of these diagrams take two additional steps of simplification.
                   First, they don’t show the bias at all. We’re supposed to remember that the
                   bias is included (along with its weight), but it’s not shown. Second, the weights
                   are often omitted as well, as in Figure 13-6. This is unfortunate, because the
                   weights are the most important part of the neuron for us. The reason for this
                   is that they are the only things we can change during training. Despite being
                   left out of most drawings, they’re so essential that we repeat the key idea yet
                   again: even though we don’t show the weights explicitly, the weights are always there.

320   Chapter 13
                    Input 1


                    Input 2


                    Input 3


                    Input 4

                    Figure 13-6: A typical drawing of an artificial neuron. The bias term and the weights are
                    not shown, but they are definitely present.

                        Like real neurons, artificial neurons can be wired up in networks,
                    where each input comes from the output of another neuron. When we con-
                    nect neurons together into networks, we draw “wires” to connect one neu-
                    ron’s output to one or more other neurons’ inputs. Figure 13-7 shows this
                    idea visually.




Figure 13-7: A piece of a larger network of artificial neurons. Each neuron receives its inputs from other neu-
rons. The dashed lines show connections to and from outside this little cluster.

                        This is a neural network. Usually the goal of a network like Figure 13-7 is
                    to produce one or more values as outputs. We’ll see later how we can inter-
                    pret the numbers at the outputs in meaningful ways.
                        Even though we’ve said that we usually don’t draw the weights, in dis-
                    cussions, sometimes it’s useful to refer to individual weights. Let’s look at
                    a common convention for weight names. Figure 13-8 shows six neurons.
                    For convenience, we’ve labeled each neuron with a letter. Each weight cor-
                    responds to how the output of one specific neuron is changed on its way to
                    another specific neuron. Each of these connections is shown as a line in the

                                                                                            Neural Networks   321
                    figure. To name a weight, we combine the name of the output neuron with
                    the input neuron. For example, the weight that multiplies the output of A
                    before it’s used by D is called AD.


                      A               AD
                                     AE
                                                                  D
                                AF
                                BD
                      B          BE
                                BF
                                                                  E
                                CD
                                  CE
                      C                CF                         F
                    Figure 13-8: The weights are named by combining the names
                    of the output and input neurons.

                         From a structural point of view, it makes no difference whether we
                    draw the weights inside each neuron, or on the wires that carry values to it.
                    Various authors assume one or the other if it makes their discussion easier
                    to follow, but we can always take the other viewpoint if we like.
                         In Figure 13-8, we named the weight from neuron A to neuron D as
                    AD. Some authors flip this around and write DA, because it’s a more direct
                    match to how we often write the equations. It’s always worth a moment to
                    check which order is being used in diagrams like this.


      Feed-Forward Networks
                    Figure 13-7 showed a neural network with no apparent structure. A key fea-
                    ture of deep learning is that we arrange our neurons into layers. Typically,
                    the neurons on each layer get their inputs only from the previous layer and
                    send their outputs only to the following layer, and neurons do not commu-
                    nicate with other neurons on the same layer (there are, as always, excep-
                    tions to these rules).
                         This organization allows us to process data in stages, with each layer of
                    neurons building on the work done by the previous stage. By analogy, consider
                    an office tower of many floors. The people on any given floor receive their
                    work only from the people on the floor immediately below them, and they
                    pass their work on only to the people on the floor immediately above them. In
                    this analogy, each floor is a layer, and the people are the neurons on that layer.
                         We say that this type of arrangement processes the data hierarchically.
                    There is some evidence that the human brain is structured to handle some
                    tasks hierarchically, including the processing of sensory data like vision and
                    hearing (Meunier et al. 2009; Serre 2014). But here again, the connection

322    Chapter 13
       between our computer models and real biology is much closer to inspira-
       tion than emulation.
            It’s amazing that hooking up neurons in a series of layers produces any-
       thing useful. As we saw earlier, a single artificial neuron can hardly manage
       to do anything. It takes a bunch of numerical inputs, weights them, adds
       the results together, and then passes that result through a little function.
       This process can identify a straight line that splits a couple of clumps of
       data, and not much else. But if we assemble many thousands of these little
       units into layers and use some clever ideas to train them, then, working
       together, they’re capable of recognizing speech, identifying faces in photo-
       graphs, and even beating humans at games of logic and skill.
            The key to this is organization. Over time people have developed a
       number of ways to organize layers of neurons, resulting in a collection of
       common layer structures. The most common network structure arranges
       the neurons so that information flows in only one direction. We call this a
       feed-forward network because the data is flowing forward, with earlier neu-
       rons feeding, or delivering values to, later neurons. The art of designing
       a deep learning system lies in choosing the right sequence of layers, and
       the right hyperparameters, to create the basic architecture. To build a use-
       ful architecture for any given application, we need to understand how the
       neurons relate to one another. Let’s now look at how collections of neurons
       communicate, and how to set up the initial weights before learning begins.


Neural Network Graphs
       We usually represent neural networks as graphs. The study of graphs is so
       large that it is considered a field of mathematics in its own right, called
       graph theory (Trudeau 1994). Here, we’re going to stick to the basic ideas of
       graphs, because that’s all we need to organize our neural networks. Though
       we know we’ll usually be working with layers, let’s start out with some gen-
       eral graphs first, such as those shown in Figure 13-9.
            A graph is made up of nodes (also called vertices or elements), here shown
       as circles. In this book, nodes are usually neurons, and throughout this
       book, we occasionally refer to one or more neurons in a network like this as
       nodes. The nodes are connected by arrows called edges (also called arcs, wires,
       or simply lines). The arrowhead is often left off when the direction of infor-
       mation flow is consistent in the drawing, which is almost always left to right
       or bottom to top. Information flows along the edges, carrying the output of
       one node to the inputs of others. Since information flows in only one direc-
       tion on each edge, we sometimes call this kind of graph a directed graph.
            The general idea is that we start things off by putting data into the
       input node or nodes, and then it flows through the edges, visiting nodes
       where it is transformed or changed, until it reaches the output node or
       nodes. No data ever returns to a node once it has left. In other words,
       information only flows forward, and there are no loops, or cycles. This kind
       of graph is like a little factory. Raw materials come in one end, and pass
       through machines that manipulate and combine them, ultimately produc-
       ing one or more finished products at the end.

                                                                    Neural Networks   323
                                                                                    Outputs




                                                           Outputs
Inputs




                                                                                         Inputs

                             (a)                                                            (b)
Figure 13-9: Two neural networks drawn as graphs. Data flows from node to node along the edges, following
the arrows. When the edges are not labeled with an arrow, data usually flows left-to-right or bottom-to-top.
(a) Mostly left-to-right flow. (b) Mostly bottom-to-top flow.

                         We say that a node near the inputs in Figure 13-9(a) is before a node
                    nearer to the outputs, which comes after it. In Figure 13-9(b), we’d say a
                    node near the inputs is below a node near the outputs, which is above it.
                    Sometimes this below/above language is used even when the graph is
                    drawn left to right, which can be confusing. It can help to think of below as
                    “closer to the inputs,” and above as “closer to the outputs.”
                         We also sometimes say that if data flows from one node to another
                    (let’s say it flows from A to B), then node A is an ancestor or parent of B, and
                    node B is a descendant or child of A.
                         A common rule in neural networks is that there are no loops. This
                    means that data coming out of a node can never make its way back into that
                    same node, no matter how circuitous a path it follows. The formal name for
                    this kind of graph is a directed acyclic graph (or DAG, pronounced to rhyme
                    with “drag”). The word directed here means that the edges have arrows
                    (which may only be implied, as we mentioned earlier). The word acyclic
                    means there are no cycles, or loops. As always, there are exceptions to the
                    rules, but they’re rare. We’ll see one such exception when we discuss recur-
                    rent neural networks (RNNs) in Chapter 19.
                         DAGs are popular in many fields, including machine learning, because
                    they are significantly easier to understand, analyze, and design than
                    arbitrary graphs that have loops. Including loops can introduce feedback,
                    where a node’s output is returned to its input. Anyone who’s moved a live



324    Chapter 13
         microphone too close to a speaker is familiar with how quickly feedback
         can grow out of control. The acyclic nature of a DAG naturally avoids the
         feedback problem, which saves us from dealing with this complex issue.
              Recall that a graph or network in which data only flows forward from
         inputs to outputs is called feed-forward. In Chapter 14, we’ll see that a key step
         in training neural networks involves temporarily flipping the arrows around,
         sending a particular type of information from the output nodes back to the
         input nodes. Although the normal flow of data is still feed-forward, when we
         push data through it backward, generally we call that a feed-backward, back-
         ward-flow, or reverse-feed algorithm. We reserve the word feedback for situations
         in which a loop in the graph can enable a node to receive its own output as
         input. As we’ve said, we generally avoid feedback in neural networks.
              Interpreting graphs like those in Figure 13-9 usually means picturing
         the information as it flows along the edges, from one node to the next. But
         this picture only makes sense if we make some conventional assumptions.
         Let’s look at those now.
              Though we often use the word flow in various forms when referring to
         how data moves through the graph, this isn’t like the flow of water through
         pipes. Water flowing through pipes is a continuous process: new molecules
         of water flow through the pipes at every moment. The graphs we work with
         (and the neural networks they represent) are discrete: information arrives
         one chunk at a time, like text messages.
              Recall from Figure 13-5 that we can draw a neural network by placing
         a weight on each edge (rather than inside a neuron). We call this style of
         the network a weighted graph. As we saw in Figure 13-6, we rarely draw the
         weights explicitly, but they are implied. It is always the case that in any neu-
         ral network graph, even if no weights are explicitly shown, we are to under-
         stand that a unique weight is on each edge and as a value moves from one
         neuron to another along that edge that value is multiplied by the weight.


Initializing the Weights
         Teaching a neural network involves gradually improving the weights. The
         process begins when we assign initial values to the weights. How should we
         pick these starting values? It turns out that, in practice, how we initialize
         the weights can have a big effect on how quickly our network learns.
              Researchers have developed theories for good ways to pick the ini-
         tial values for the weights, and the various algorithms that have proved
         most useful are each named after the lead authors on the publications
         that describe them. The LeCun Uniform, Glorot Uniform (or Xavier Uniform),
         and He Uniform algorithms are all based on selecting initial values from a
         uniform distribution (LeCun et al. 1998; Glorot and Bengio 2010; He et
         al. 2015). It probably won’t be much of a surprise that the similarly named
         LeCun Normal, Glorot Normal (or Xavier Normal), and He Normal initialization
         methods draw their values from a normal distribution.




                                                                         Neural Networks   325
                        We don’t need to get into the math behind these algorithms. Happily,
                    modern deep learning libraries offer each of these schemes, plus variations
                    on them. Often the technique used by the library by default works great, so
                    we rarely need to explicitly choose how to initialize the weights.


      Deep Networks
                    Of the many possible ways to organize neurons in a network, placing them
                    in a series of layers has proven to be both flexible and extremely powerful.
                    Typically, neurons within a layer aren’t connected to one another. Their
                    inputs come from the previous layer, and their outputs go to the next layer.
                         In fact, the phrase deep learning comes from this structure. If we imag-
                    ine many layers drawn side by side, we might call the network “wide.” If they
                    were drawn vertically and we stood at the bottom looking up, we might call
                    it “tall.” If we stood at the top and looked down, we might call it “deep.”
                    And that’s all that deep learning means: a network made of a series of layers
                    that we often draw vertically.
                         A result of organizing neurons in layers is that we can analyze data
                    hierarchically. The early layers process the raw input data, and each sub-
                    sequent layer is able to use information from neurons on the previous
                    layer to process larger chunks of data. For example, when considering a
                    photograph, the first layer usually looks at the individual pixels. The next
                    layer looks at groups of pixels, the one after that looks at groups of those
                    groups, and so on. Early layers might notice that some pixels are darker
                    than others, whereas later layers might notice that a clump of pixels looks
                    like an eye, and a much later layer might notice the collection of shapes
                    that reveal that the whole image shows a tiger.
                         Figure 13-10 shows an example of a deep learning architecture using
                    three layers.

                                            Outputs


                     Layer 3                                    Output Layer


                     Layer 2                                    Hidden Layer


                     Layer 1                                    Hidden Layer



                                              Inputs            Input Layer
                    Figure 13-10: A deep learning network


326    Chapter 13
                        When we draw the layers vertically, as in Figure 13-10, the inputs are
                   almost always drawn at the bottom, and the outputs where we collect our
                   results are almost always drawn at the top.
                        In Figure 13-10, all three layers contain neurons. In practical systems,
                   we usually use lots of other kinds of layers, which we might group together
                   as support layers. We’ll see many such layers in later chapters. When we count
                   the number of layers in a network, we usually don’t count these support lay-
                   ers. Figure 13-10 would be described as a deep network of three layers.
                        The topmost layer that contains neurons (Layer 3 in Figure 13-10) is
                   called the output layer.
                        We would probably expect that Layer 1 in Figure 13-10 would be called
                   the input layer, but it’s not. In a quirk of terminology, the term input layer
                   is applied to the bottom of the network, labeled “Inputs” in Figure 13-10.
                   There’s no processing in this “layer.” Instead it’s just the memory where the
                   input values reside. The input layer is an example of a support layer because
                   it has no neurons, and therefore isn’t included when we count the layers in a
                   network. The number of layers we count is called the network’s depth.
                        If we imagine standing above the top of Figure 13-10 and looking down,
                   we only see the output layer. If we imagine we are below the bottom and
                   looking up, we only see the input layer. The layers in between aren’t visible to
                   us. Each of these layers between the input and output is called a hidden layer.
                        Sometimes the stack is drawn left to right, as in Figure 13-11.



                          Layer 1                Layer 2                 Layer 3




Inputs                                                                                           Outputs




Input Layer            Hidden Layer            Hidden Layer           Output Layer
Figure 13-11: The same deep network of Figure 13-10, but drawn with data flowing left to right

                        Even when drawn this way, we still use terms that refer to the vertical
                   orientation. Authors might say that Layer 2 is “above” Layer 1, and “below”
                   Layer 3. We can always keep things straight regardless of how the diagram
                   is drawn if we think of “above” or “higher” as referring to a layer closer to
                   the outputs, and “below” or “lower” as meaning closer to the inputs.

                                                                                         Neural Networks   327
      Fully Connected Layers
                    A fully connected layer (also called an FC, linear, or dense layer) is a set of neu-
                    rons that each receive an input from every neuron on the previous layer. For
                    example, if there are three neurons in a dense layer, and four neurons in the
                    preceding layer, then each neuron in the dense layer has four inputs, one
                    from each neuron in the preceding layer, for a total of 3 × 4 = 12 connections,
                    each with an associated weight.
                        Figure 13-12(a) shows a diagram of a fully connected layer with three
                    neurons, coming after a layer with four neurons.




                                                                                      3




                                      (a)                                     (b)
                    Figure 13-12: A fully connected layer. (a) The colored neurons make up a fully connected
                    layer. Each of the neurons in this layer receives an input from every neuron in the previous
                    layer. (b) Our schematic symbol for a fully connected layer.

                         Figure 13-12(b) shows a schematic shorthand that we’ll use for fully
                    connected layers. The idea is that two neurons are at the top and bottom
                    of the symbol, and the vertical and diagonal lines are the four connections
                    between them. Next to the symbol, we identify how many neurons are in
                    the layer, as we’ve done here with the number 3. When it’s relevant, this is
                    also where we identify that layer’s activation function. If a layer is made up
                    of only dense layers, it is sometimes called a fully connected network, or, in a
                    throwback to earlier terminology, a multilayer perceptron (MLP).
                         In later chapters, we’ll see many other types of layers that help us orga-
                    nize our neurons in useful ways. For example, convolution layers and pooling
                    layers have proven very useful for image processing tasks, and we’ll give
                    them a lot of attention.


      Tensors
                    We’ve seen that a deep learning system is built from a sequence of layers.
                    And though the output of any neuron is a single number, we often want to
                    talk about the output of an entire layer at once. The key idea that character-
                    izes this collection of output numbers is its shape. Let’s see what that means.
                         If the layer contains a single neuron, the layer’s output is just a single
                    number. We might describe this as an array, or a list, with one element.
                    Mathematically, we can call this a zero-dimensional array. The number of

328    Chapter 13
                      dimensions in an array tells us how many indices we need to use to identify
                      an element. Since a single number needs no indices, that array has zero
                      dimensions.
                           If we have multiple neurons in a layer, then we can describe their col-
                      lective output as a list of all the values. Since we need one index to identify
                      a particular output value in this list, this is a one-dimensional (1D) array.
                      Figure 13-13(a) shows such an array containing 12 elements.

                                                                                                     4        5       6
                                                             1   2   3      4   5   6           1    2            3
 1   2   3    4   5    6     7   8   9 10 11 12                                                                       12
                                                             7   8   9 10 11 12
                                                                                                7   8             9
                           (a)                                        (b)                               (c)

Figure 13-13: Three tensors, each with 12 elements. (a) A 1D tensor is a list. (b) A 2D tensor is a grid. (c) A
3D tensor is a volume. In all cases, and in higher-dimensional cases as well, there are no holes and no ele-
ments stick out from the block.

                           We frequently organize our data into other box-like shapes. For instance,
                      if the input to our system is a black and white image, it can be represented as
                      a 2D array, as in Figure 13-13(b), indexed by x and y positions. If it’s a color
                      image, then it can be represented as a 3D array, indexed by x position, y posi-
                      tion, and color channel. A 3D shape is shown in Figure 13-13(c).
                           We frequently call a 1D shape an array, list, or vector. To describe a 2D
                      shape we often use the terms grid or matrix, and we can describe a 3D shape
                      as a volume or block. We will often use arrays with even more dimensions.
                      Rather than create a mountain of new terms, we use a single term for any
                      collection of numbers arranged in a box shape with any number of dimen-
                      sions: a tensor (pronounced ten′-sir).
                           A tensor is merely a block of numbers with a given number of dimensions
                      and a size in each dimension. It has no holes and no bits sticking out. The
                      term tensor has a more complex meaning in some fields of math and physics,
                      but in machine learning, we use this word to mean a collection of numbers
                      organized into a multidimensional block. Taken together, the number of
                      dimensions and the size in each dimension provide the shape of the tensor.
                           We often refer to a network’s input tensor (meaning all the input values),
                      and its output tensor (meaning all the output values). The outputs of internal
                      (or hidden) layers have no special name, so we usually say something like
                      “the tensor produced by layer 3” to refer to the multidimensional array of
                      numbers coming out of the neurons on layer 3.


     Preventing Network Collapse
                      Earlier we promised to return to activation functions. Let’s look at them now.
                           Each activation function, while a small piece of the overall structure, is
                      critical to a successful neural network. Without activation functions, the neu-
                      rons in a network combine, or collapse, into the equivalent of a single neuron.
                      And, as we saw earlier, one neuron has very little computational power.

                                                                                             Neural Networks          329
                       Let’s see how a network collapses when it doesn’t have activation func-
                   tions. Figure 13-14 shows a little network with two inputs (A and B), and five
                   neurons (E through G) on three layers. Every neuron receives an input from
                   every neuron on the previous layer, and each connection has a weight, giving
                   us a total of ten weights, shown in red.

                   A      2           C     3          E
                          3                 4                 2
                                                                        G
                          4                 1                 3
                   B      1           D     2          F
                   Figure 13-14: A little network of two inputs, five neurons, and ten weights

                        Let’s suppose for the moment that these neurons don’t have activation
                   functions. Then we can write the output of each neuron as a weighted sum
                   of its inputs, as in Figure 13-15. In this figure, we’re using the mathemati-
                   cal convention of leaving out the multiplication sign when possible, so 2A is
                   shorthand for 2 × A.

                                 2A+4B             3C+D
                   A      2          C      3          E
                          3                 4                 2
                                                                        G
                          4                 1                 3     2E+3F
                   B      1           D     2          F
                                   3A+B            4C+2D
                   Figure 13-15: Each neuron is labeled with the value of its output.

                       The outputs of C and D depend only on A and B. Similarly, the outputs
                   of E and F only depend on the outputs of C and D, which means that they,
                   too, ultimately depend only on A and B. The same argument holds for G. If
                   we start with the expression for G, plug in the values for E and F, and then
                   plug in the values for C and D, we get a big expression in terms of A and B.
                   If we do that and simplify, we find that the output of G is 78A + 86B. We can
                   write this as a single neuron with two new weights, as shown in Figure 13-16.
                       This output of G in Figure 13-16 is exactly the same as the output of G
                   in Figure 13-14. Our whole network has collapsed into a single neuron!
                       No matter how big or complicated our neural network is, if it has no
                   activation functions, then it will always be equivalent to a single neuron.
                   This is bad news if we want our network to be able to do anything more
                   than what one neuron can do.



330   Chapter 13
        A
                 78
                           G
                 86      78A+86B
         B
        Figure 13-16: This network’s output is exactly the
        same as the output in Figure 13-14.

             In mathematical language, we say that our fully connected network col-
        lapsed because it only used addition and multiplication, which are in the
        category of linear functions. Linear functions can combine as we just saw, but
        nonlinear functions are fundamentally different and don’t combine this way.
        By designing activation functions to use nonlinear operations, we prevent this
        kind of collapse. We sometimes call an activation function a nonlinearity.
             There are many different types of activation functions, each producing
        different results. Generally speaking, the variety is there because in some
        situations, some functions can run into numerical trouble, making training
        run more slowly than it should, or even cease altogether. If that happens,
        we can substitute an alternative activation function that avoids the problem
        (though of course it has its own weak points).
             In practice, a handful of activation functions are all we usually use. When
        reading the literature and looking at other people’s networks, we sometimes
        see the rarer activation function. Let’s survey the functions that by most major
        libraries usually provide and then gather together the most common ones.


Activation Functions
        An activation function (sometimes also called a transfer function, or a non-
        linearity) takes a floating-point number as input and returns a new floating-
        point number as output. We can define these functions by drawing them
        as little graphs, without any equations or code. The horizontal, or X, axis
        is the input value, and the vertical, or Y, axis is the output value. To find
        the output for any input, we locate the input along the X axis, and move
        directly upward until we hit the curve. That’s the output value.
             In theory, we can apply a different activation function to every neuron
        in our network, but in practice, we usually assign the same activation func-
        tion to all the neurons in each layer.

        Straight-Line Functions
        Let’s first look at activation functions that are made up of one or more
        straight lines. Figure 13-17 shows a few “curves” that are just straight lines.
             Let’s look at the leftmost example in Figure 13-17. If we pick any point
        on the X axis, and go vertically up until we hit the line, the value of that
        intersection on the Y axis is the same as the value on the X axis. The out-
        put, or y value, of this curve is always the same as the input, or x value. We
        call this the identity function.

                                                                       Neural Networks   331
                   Figure 13-17: Straight-line functions. The leftmost function is called the identity function.

                        The other curves in Figure 13-17 are also straight lines, but they’re
                   tilted to different slopes. We call any curve that’s just a single straight line a
                   linear function, or even (slightly confusingly) a linear curve.
                        These activation functions do not prevent network collapse. When the
                   activation function is a single straight line, then mathematically, it’s only
                   doing multiplication and addition, and that means it’s a linear function and
                   the network can collapse. These straight-line activation functions usually
                   appear only in two specific situations.
                        The first application is on a network’s output neurons. There’s no
                   risk of collapse since there are no neurons after the output. The top of
                   Figure 13-18 shows the idea.




                                                                       Output Neuron




                                                                           Process


                   Figure 13-18: Using the identity as an activation function. Top: The identity function on an
                   output neuron. Bottom: Using an identity function to insert a step of processing between
                   the summation step and a nonlinear activation function for any neuron.




332   Chapter 13
    The second situation where we use a straight-line activation function is
when we want to insert some processing between the summation step in a
neuron and its activation function. In this case, we apply the identity func-
tion to the neuron, perform the processing step, and then perform the non-
linear activation function, as shown at the bottom of Figure 13-18.
    Since we generally want nonlinear activation functions, we need to get
away from a single straight line. All of the following activation functions are
nonlinear and prevent network collapse.

Step Functions
We don’t want a straight line, but we can’t pick just any curve. Our curve
needs to be single-valued. As we discussed in Chapter 5, this means that if
we look upward from any value of x along the X axis, there’s only one value
of y above us. An easy variation on a linear function is to start with a straight
line and break it up into several pieces. They don’t even have to join. In the
language of Chapter 5, this means that they don’t have to be continuous.
     Figure 13-19 shows an example of this approach. We call this a stair-
step function. In this example, it outputs the value 0 if the input is from 0 to
just less than 0.2, but then the output is 0.2 if the input value is from 0.2
to just less than 0.4, and so on. These abrupt jumps don’t violate our rule
that the curve has only one y output value for each input x value.




Figure 13-19: This curve is made up of multiple straight lines. A filled circle tells us that the
y value there is valid, whereas an open circle tells us that there is no curve at that point.



                                                                            Neural Networks   333
                        The simplest stair-step function has only a single step. This is a frequent
                   special case, so it gets its own name: the step function. The original percep-
                   tron of Figure 13-2 used a step function as its activation function. A step
                   function is usually drawn as in Figure 13-20(a). It has one value until some
                   threshold and then it has some other value.
                        Different people have different preferences for what happens when
                   the input has precisely the value of the threshold. In Figure 13-20(a) we’re
                   showing that the value at the threshold is the value of the right side of the
                   step, as shown by the solid dot.




                   Figure 13-20: A step function has two fixed values, one each to the left and right of a
                   threshold value of x.

                        Often authors are casual about what happens when the input is
                   exactly at the transition, and draw the picture as in Figure 13-20(b)
                   in order to stress the “step” of the function. This is an ambiguous way
                   to draw the curve because we don’t know what value is intended when
                   the input is precisely at the threshold, but it’s a common kind of draw-
                   ing (often we don’t care which value is used at the threshold, so we can
                   choose whatever we prefer).
                        A couple of popular versions of the step have their own names. The unit
                   step is 0 to the left of the threshold, and 1 to the right. Figure 13-21 shows
                   this function.
                        If the threshold value of a unit step is 0, then we give it the more spe-
                   cific name of the Heaviside step, also shown in Figure 13-21.




334   Chapter 13
Figure 13-21: Left: The unit step has a value of 0 to the left of the threshold, and 1 to the
right. Right: The Heaviside step is a unit step where the threshold is 0.

    Finally, if we have a Heaviside step (so the threshold is at 0) but the
value to the left is −1 rather than 0, we call this the sign function, shown
in Figure 13-22. There’s a popular variation of the sign function where
input values that are exactly 0 are assigned an output value of 0. Both
variations are commonly called “the sign function,” so when the differ-
ence matters, it’s worth paying attention to figure out which one is being
referred to.




Figure 13-22: Two versions of the sign function. Left: Values less than 0 are assigned an
output of −1, all others are 1. Right: Like the left, except that an input of exactly 0 gets the
value 0.




                                                                           Neural Networks   335
                   Piecewise Linear Functions
                   If a function is made up of several pieces, each of which is a straight line, we
                   call it piecewise linear. This is still a nonlinear function as long as the pieces,
                   taken together, don’t form a single straight line.
                        Perhaps the most popular activation function is a piecewise linear func-
                   tion called a rectifier, or rectified linear unit, which is abbreviated ReLU (note
                   that the e is lowercase). The name comes from an electronics part called a
                   rectifier, which can be used to prevent negative voltages from passing from
                   one part of a circuit to another (Kuphaldt 2017). When the voltage goes
                   negative, the physical rectifier clamps it to 0, and our rectified linear unit
                   does the same thing with the numbers that are fed into it.
                        The ReLU’s graph is shown in Figure 13-23. It’s made up of two straight
                   lines, but thanks to the kink, or bend, this is not a linear function. If the
                   input is less than 0, then the output is 0. Otherwise, the output is the same
                   as the input.




                   Figure 13-23: The ReLU, or rectified linear unit. It outputs 0 for all negative inputs,
                   otherwise the output is the input.

                        The ReLU activation function is popular because it’s a simple and
                   fast way to include a nonlinearity at the end of our artificial neurons. But
                   there’s a potential problem. As we’ll see in Chapter 14, if changes in the
                   input don’t lead to changes in the output, a network can stop learning. And


336   Chapter 13
the ReLU has an output of 0 for every negative value. If our input changes
from, say, –3 to –2, then the output of ReLU stays at 0. Fixing this problem
has led to the development of the ReLU variations that follow.
    Despite this issue, ReLU (or leaky ReLU, which we’ll see next) often
performs well in practice, and people often use it as their default choice
when building a new network, particularly for fully connected layers.
Beyond the fact that these activation functions work well in practice, there
are good mathematical reasons for wanting to use ReLU (Limmer and
Stanczak 2017), though we won’t explore them here.
    The leaky ReLU changes the response for negative values. Rather than
output a 0 for any negative value, this functions outputs the input, scaled
down by a factor of 10. Figure 13-24 shows this function.




Figure 13-24: The leaky ReLU is like the ReLU, but it returns a scaled-down value
of x when x is negative.

     Of course, there’s no need to always scale down the negative values
by a factor of 10. A parametric ReLU lets us choose by how much negative
amounts are scaled, as shown in Figure 13-25.
     When using a parametric ReLU, the essential thing is to never select a
factor of exactly 1.0, because then we lose the kink, the function becomes
a straight line, and any neuron we apply this to collapses with those that
immediately follow it.



                                                                       Neural Networks   337
                   Figure 13-25: A parametric ReLU is like a leaky ReLU, but the slope for values of x that are
                   less than 0 can be specified.

                      Another variation on the basic ReLU is the shifted ReLU, which just
                   moves the bend down and left. Figure 13-26 shows an example.




                   Figure 13-26: The shifted ReLU moves the bend in the ReLU function down and left.

                        We can generalize the various flavors of ReLU with an activation func-
                   tion called maxout (Goodfellow et al. 2013). Maxout allows us to define a
                   set of lines. The output of the function at each point is the largest value




338   Chapter 13
among all the lines, evaluated at that point. Figure 13-27 shows maxout
with just two lines, forming a ReLU, as well as two other examples that use
more lines to create more complex shapes.




Figure 13-27: The maxout function lets us build up a function from multiple straight lines.
The heavy red line is the output of maxout for each set of lines.

     Another variation on the basic ReLU is to add a small random value
to the input before running it through a standard ReLU. This function is
called a noisy ReLU.

Smooth Functions
As we’ll see in Chapter 14, a key step in teaching neural networks involves
computing derivatives for the outputs of neurons, which necessarily involve
their activation functions.
     The activation functions that we saw in the last section (except for the
linear functions) create their nonlinearities by using multiple straight lines
with at least one kink in the collection. Mathematically, there is no deriva-
tive at the kink between a pair of straight lines, and therefore the function
is not linear.
     If these kinks prevent the computation of derivatives, which are nec-
essary for teaching a network, why are functions like ReLU useful at all,
let alone so popular? It turns out that standard mathematical tools can
finesse the sharp corners like those in ReLU and still produce a derivative
(Oppenheim and Nawab 1996). These tricks don’t work on all functions,
but one of the principles that guided the development of the functions we
saw earlier is that they allow these methods to be used.
     An alternative to using multiple straight lines and then patching up the
problems is to use smooth functions that inherently have a derivative every-
where. That is, they’re smooth everywhere. Let’s look at a few popular and
smooth activation functions.
     The softplus function simply smooths out the ReLU, as shown in
Figure 13-28.




                                                                         Neural Networks   339
                   Figure 13-28: The softplus function is a smoothed version of the ReLU.

                        We can smooth out the shifted ReLU as well. This is called the exponen-
                   tial ReLU, or ELU (Clevert, Unterthiner, and Hochreiter 2016). It’s shown in
                   Figure 13-29.




                   Figure 13-29: The exponential ReLU, or ELU

340   Chapter 13
      Another way to smooth out the ReLU is called swish (Ramachandran,
Zoph, and Le 2017). Figure 13-30 shows what this looks like. In essence
it’s a ReLU, but with a small, smooth bump just left of 0, which then flat-
tens out.




Figure 13-30: The swish activation function

    Another popular smooth activation function is the sigmoid, also called
the logistic function or logistic curve. This is a smoothed-out version of the
Heaviside step. The name sigmoid comes from the resemblance of the curve
to an S shape, while the other names refer to its mathematical interpreta-
tion. Figure 13-31 shows this function.
    Closely related to the sigmoid is another mathematical function called
the hyperbolic tangent. It’s much like the sigmoid, only negative values are
sent to –1 rather than to 0. The name comes from the curve’s origins in
trigonometry. It’s a big name, so it’s usually written simply as tanh. This is
shown in Figure 13-32.
    We say that the sigmoid and tanh functions both squash their entire
input range from negative to positive infinity into a small range of output
values. The sigmoid squashes all inputs to the range [0, 1], while tanh
squashes them to [−1, 1].




                                                             Neural Networks   341
                   Figure 13-31: The S-shaped sigmoid function is also called the logistic function or logis-
                   tic curve. It has a value of 0 for very negative inputs, and a value of 1 for very positive
                   inputs. For inputs in the range of about −6 to 6, it smoothly transitions between the two.




                   Figure 13-32: The hyperbolic tangent function, written tanh, is S-shaped like the sigmoid
                   of Figure 13-31. The key differences are that it returns a value of −1 for very negative
                   inputs, and the transition zone is a bit narrower.

342   Chapter 13
    The two are shown on top of one another in Figure 13-33.




Figure 13-33: The sigmoid function (orange) and tanh function (teal),
both plotted for the range −8 to 8

    Another smooth activation function uses a sine wave, as shown in
Figure 13-34 (Sitzmann 2020). This squashes the outputs to the range
[–1, 1] like tanh, but it doesn’t saturate (or stop changing) for inputs that
are far from 0.




Figure 13-34: A sine wave activation function

                                                                        Neural Networks   343
                    Activation Function Gallery
                    Figure 13-35 summarizes the activation functions we’ve discussed.




Figure 13-35: A gallery of popular activation functions


                    Comparing Activation Functions
                    ReLU used to be the most popular activation function, but in recent years,
                    the leaky ReLU has been gaining in popularity. This is a result of practice:
                    networks with leaky ReLU often learn faster.
                         The reason is that ReLU has a problem, which we mentioned earlier.
                    When a ReLU’s input is negative, its output is 0. If the input is a large nega-
                    tive number, then changing it by a small amount still results in a negative

344    Chapter 13
          input to ReLU and an unchanged output of 0. This means that the deriva-
          tive is also zero. As we’ll see in Chapter 14, when a neuron’s derivative goes
          to zero, not only does it stop learning, but it also makes it more likely that
          the neurons that precede it in the network will stop learning as well. Because
          a neuron whose output never changes no longer participates in learning, we
          sometimes use rather drastic language and say that the neuron has died. The
          leaky ReLU has been gaining in popularity over ReLU because, by providing
          an output that isn’t the same for every negative input, its derivative is not 0,
          and thus it does not die. The sine wave function also has a non-zero deriva-
          tive almost everywhere (except at the very top and bottom of each wave).
               After ReLU and leaky ReLU, sigmoid and tanh are probably the next
          most popular functions. Their appeal is that they’re smooth, and the out-
          puts are bounded to [0, 1] or [–1, 1]. Experience has shown that networks
          learn most efficiently when all the values flowing through it are in a limited
          range.
               There is no firm theory to tell us which activation function works best
          in a specific layer of a specific network. We usually start by making the same
          choices that have worked in other, similar networks that we’ve seen, and
          then we try alternatives if learning goes too slowly.
               A few rules of thumb give us a good starting point in many situations.
          Generally speaking, we often apply ReLU or leaky ReLU to most neurons
          on hidden layers, particularly fully connected layers. For regression net-
          works, we often use no activation function on the final layer (or if we must
          supply one, we use a linear activation function, which amounts to the same
          thing), because we care about the specific output value. When we’re classify-
          ing with just two classes, we have just a single output value. Here we often
          apply a sigmoid to push the output clearly to one class or the other. For clas-
          sification networks with more than two classes, we almost always use a some-
          what different kind of activation function, which we’ll look at next.


Softmax
          There’s an operation that we typically apply only to the output neurons of
          a classifier neural network, and even then, only if there are two or more
          output neurons. It’s not an activation function in the sense that we’ve been
          using the term because it takes as input the outputs of all the output neu-
          rons simultaneously. It processes them together and then produces a new
          output value for each neuron. Though it’s not quite an activation function,
          it’s close enough in spirit to activation functions to merit including it in this
          discussion.
                The technique is called softmax. The purpose of softmax is to turn
          the raw numbers that come out of a classification network into class
          probabilities.
                It’s important to note that softmax takes the place of any activation
          function we’d otherwise apply to those output neurons. That is, we give
          them no activation function (or, equivalently, apply the linear function)
          and then run those outputs into softmax.


                                                                         Neural Networks   345
                        The mechanics of this process are involved with the mathematics of
                   how the network computes its predictions, so we won’t go into those details
                   here. The general idea is shown in Figure 13-36: scores come in, and prob-
                   abilities come out.

                                       Output
                                      neurons
                                                  A score
                                                                                       Probability of A

                                                                 Softmax
                                                  B score
                   Network                                                             Probability of B


                                                  C score
                                                                                       Probability of C



                   Figure 13-36: The softmax function takes all the network’s outputs and modifies them
                   simultaneously. The result is that the scores are turned into probabilities.

                        Each output neuron presents a value, or score, that corresponds to how
                   much the network thinks the input is of that class. In Figure 13-36 we’re
                   assuming that we have three classes in our data, named A, B, and C, so
                   each of the three output neurons gives us a score for its class. The larger
                   the score, the more certain the system is that the input belongs to that class.
                        If one class has a larger score than some other class, it means the net-
                   work thinks that class is more likely. That’s useful. But the scores aren’t
                   designed to be compared in any other convenient way. For instance, if the
                   score for A is twice that of B, it doesn’t mean that A is twice as likely as B. It
                   just means that A is more likely. Because making comparisons like “twice
                   as likely” is so useful, we use softmax to turn the output scores into prob-
                   abilities. Now, if the softmax output of A is twice that of B, then indeed A is
                   twice as probable as B. That’s such a useful way to look at the network’s out-
                   put that we almost always use softmax at the end of a classification network.
                        Any set of numbers that we want to treat as probabilities must satisfy
                   two criteria: the values all lie between 0 and 1, and they add up to 1. If we
                   just modify each output of the network independently, we don’t know the
                   other values, so we can’t make sure they added up to anything in particular.
                   When we hand all the outputs to softmax, it can simultaneously adjust all
                   the values so that they sum to 1.
                        Let’s look at softmax in action. Consider the top-left graph of
                   Figure 13-37.




346   Chapter 13
Figure 13-37: The softmax function takes all the network’s outputs and modifies them simultaneously. The result
is that the scores are turned into probabilities. Top row: Scores from a classifier. Bottom row: Results of run-
ning the scores in the top row through softmax. Note that the graphs in the upper row use different vertical
scales.


                        The top left of Figure 13-37 shows the outputs for a classifier with six
                   output neurons, which we’ve labeled A through F. In this example, all
                   six of these values are between 0 and 1. From this graph, we can see
                   that the value for class B is 0.1 and the value for class C is 0.8. As we’ve
                   discussed, it is a mistake to conclude from this that the input is 8 times
                   more likely to be in class C than class B, because these are scores and
                   not probabilities. We can say that class C is more likely than class B, but
                   anything more requires some math. To usefully compare these outputs
                   to one another, we can apply softmax to carry out that math, and change
                   them into probabilities.
                        We show the output of softmax in the graph in the lower left. These
                   are the probabilities of the input belonging to each of the six classes. It’s
                   interesting to note that the big values, like C and F, get scaled down by a
                   lot, but the small values, like B, are hardly scaled at all. This is a natural
                   result of how scores between 0 and 1 turn into probabilities. But the order-
                   ing of the bars by size is still the same as it was for the scores (with C the
                   largest, then F, then D, and so on). From the probabilities produced by
                   softmax in the lower figure, we can see that class C has a probability of
                   about 0.25, and class B has a probability of about 0.15. We can conclude
                   that the input is a little more than 1.5 times more probable to be in class C
                   than class B.
                        The middle and right columns of Figure 13-37 show the outputs for
                   two other hypothetical networks and inputs, before and after softmax.
                   The three examples show that the output of softmax depends on whether
                   the inputs are all less than 1. The input ranges in Figure 13-37, reading
                   left to right, are [0, 0.8], [0, 8], and [0, 3]. Softmax always preserves the

                                                                                            Neural Networks   347
                    ordering of its inputs (that is, if we sort the inputs from largest to small-
                    est, they match a similar sort on the outputs). But when some input values
                    are greater than 1, the largest value tends to stand out more. We say that
                    softmax exaggerates the influence of the output with the largest value.
                    Sometimes we also say that softmax crushes the other values, making the
                    largest one dominate the others more obviously.
                         Figure 13-37 shows that the input range makes a big difference in the
                    output of softmax. Softmax also has an interesting behavior depending on
                    whether the inputs values are all less than 1, all greater than 1, or mixed.
                         At the far left of Figure 13-37 all of the inputs are all less than 1, in the
                    range [0, 0.8].
                         In the middle column, the inputs are all greater than 1, in the range
                    [0, 8]. Notice that in the output, the value of D (corresponding to the 8)
                    clearly dominates all of the other values. Softmax has exaggerated the dif-
                    ferences among the outputs, making it easier to pick out D as the largest.
                         On the far right of Figure 13-37 we have values both less and greater
                    than 1, in the range [0, 3]. Here the exaggeration effect is somewhere
                    between the left column, where all inputs are less than 1, and the middle
                    column, where all inputs are greater than 1.
                         In all cases, though, softmax gives us back probabilities that are each
                    between 0 and 1, and sum up to 1. The ordering of the inputs is always
                    preserved, so the sequence of largest to smallest input is also the largest to
                    smallest output.


      Summary
                    Real, biological neurons are sophisticated nerve cells that process informa-
                    tion using a fabulously complex range of chemical, electrical, and mechani-
                    cal processes. They serve as the inspiration for a simple bit of computation
                    that we call an artificial neuron, despite the enormous gulf between the
                    computer version and its biological namesake. An artificial neuron mul-
                    tiplies each input value by a corresponding weight, adds the results, then
                    passes that through an activation function. We can assemble artificial neu-
                    rons into networks. Typically, those networks are DAGs: they are directed
                    (information flows in only one direction), they are acyclic (no neuron ever
                    receives its own output as an input), and they are graphs (the neurons are
                    connected to one another). Input data enters at one end, and the network’s
                    results appear at the other.
                         We saw how, if we’re not careful in constructing our network, the entire
                    network can collapse into a single neuron. We prevent this by using the acti-
                    vation function, a small function that takes each neuron’s output and turns
                    it into a new number. These functions are designed to be nonlinear, mean-
                    ing that they cannot be described merely by operations such as addition
                    and multiplication. It is this nonlinearity that prevents the network from
                    being equivalent to a single neuron. We concluded the chapter by looking
                    at some of the more common activation functions, and how softmax can
                    turn the numbers we get from a neural network into class probabilities.


348    Chapter 13
     The only difference between untrained deep learning systems and
those that have been trained and are ready for deployment is in the value
of the weights. The goal of training, or learning, is to find values for the
weights so that the network’s output is correct for as many samples as pos-
sible. Since the weights start out with random numbers, we need some prin-
cipled way to find these new, useful values. In Chapters 14 and 15, we’ll see
how neural networks learn by looking at the two key algorithms that gradu-
ally improve the starting weights, transforming a network’s outputs into
accurate, useful results.




                                                            Neural Networks   349
