                                9
                  OVERFIT TING AND
                   UNDERFIT TING




            Whether we’re a person or a computer,
            learning general rules about a subject from
           a finite set of examples is a tough challenge.
       If we don’t pay enough attention to the details
of the examples, our rules will be too general to be
of much use when we’re considering new data. On
the other hand, if we pay too much attention to the
details in the examples, our rules will be too specific,
and again we’ll do a bad job at evaluating new data.
     These phenomena are respectively called underfitting and overfitting.
The more common and troublesome problem of the two is overfitting, and
if unchecked, it can leave us with a system that’s all but useless. We control
overfitting and rein it in with techniques known collectively as regularization.
     In this chapter we look at the causes of overfitting and underfitting,
and how to address them. Finally, we wrap up the chapter by seeing how to
use Bayesian methods to fit a straight line to a bunch of data points.
      Finding a Good Fit
                   When our system learns from the training data so well that it does poorly
                   when presented with new data, we say that it’s overfitting. When it doesn’t
                   learn from the training data well enough and does poorly when presented
                   with new data, we say that it’s underfitting. Since overfitting is usually a
                   harder problem, we’ll look at it first.

                   Overfitting
                   Let’s approach our discussion of overfitting with a metaphor. Suppose
                   we’ve been invited to a big open-air wedding where we know almost nobody.
                   Over the course of the afternoon, we drift through the gathering guests,
                   exchanging introductions and small talk. We’ve decided to make an effort
                   to remember people’s names, so each time we meet someone, we make up
                   some kind of mental association between their appearance and their name
                   (Foer 2012; Proctor 1978). One of the people we meet is a fellow named
                   Walter who has a big walrus mustache. We make a mental picture of Walter
                   as a walrus and try to make that picture stick in our minds. Later, we meet
                   someone named Erin, and we notice she’s wearing beautiful turquoise
                   earrings. We make a mental picture of her earrings that have been short-
                   ened in one direction, so earring becomes Erin. We make a similar mental
                   image for everyone we meet, and as we mingle and bump into some of the
                   same people again, we remember their names with ease. The system is
                   working great.
                        That evening at the reception we encounter lots of new people. At one
                   point we bump into someone with a big walrus mustache. We smile and say,
                   “Hi again, Walter!” only to get a confused expression. This is Bob, someone
                   we haven’t met before. The same thing can happen repeatedly. We might be
                   introduced to someone with beautiful earrings, but this is Susan, not Erin.
                   The problem is that our mental pictures have misled us. It’s not that we
                   didn’t learn people’s names properly, because we did. We just learned them
                   in a way that worked only for the people in the original group and didn’t
                   generalize when we met more people.
                        To associate someone’s appearance with their name, we need some
                   kind of connection between the two ideas. The more robust that connec-
                   tion, the better we can be at recognizing that person in a new context,
                   even if they’re wearing a hat or glasses or something else that alters their
                   appearance. In the case of our wedding, we learned people’s names by con-
                   necting them to a single idiosyncratic feature. The problem is that when we
                   met someone else with that same feature at the reception, we had no way to
                   determine that this was someone new.
                        At the pre-wedding party, we thought we were doing well because when
                   we evaluated our performance using the training data (the names of peo-
                   ple at the wedding), we got most of the results right. If we focused on the
                   number of successes, we say that we achieved a high training accuracy. If we
                   focus instead on the number of failures, we’d say we had a low training error
                   (or training loss). But when we then went to the reception and needed to


196    Chapter 9
        evaluate new data (the names of the additional people we met), our general-
        ization accuracy was low, or equivalently, our generalization error (or generaliza-
        tion loss) was high.
             We saw an example of this same problem in Chapter 8, where we erro-
        neously identified a husky on a couch as being a Yorkshire terrier, because
        we used the couch as our only cue for identifying the breed of the dog on it.
             Our errors with both people and dogs were due to overfitting. In other
        words, we learned how to classify the data in front of us, but we used spe-
        cific details in that data, rather than learning general rules that would
        apply to new data as well.
             Machine learning systems are really good at overfitting. Sometimes we
        say that they’re good at cheating. If there’s some quirk in the input data that
        helps the system get the correct result, it finds and exploits that quirk, like
        our story in Chapter 8 of how a system was supposed to be solving the hard
        problem of finding camouflaged tanks in photos of trees but probably was
        taking the easy way out and simply noting whether the sky was sunny or
        cloudy.
             We can take two actions to control overfitting. First, we can catch when
        the rules get too specific and stop the learning process at that moment.
        Second, using regularization methods, we can delay the onset of overfitting
        by encouraging the system to keep learning general rules as long as pos-
        sible. We’ll look at each approach in a moment.

        Underfitting
        The opposite of overfitting is underfitting. In contrast to overfitting, which
        results from using rules that are too precise, underfitting describes the
        situation when our rules are too vague or generic. At the wedding party,
        we might underfit by creating a rule that says, “people wearing pants are
        named Walter.” Although this is accurate for one particular piece of data,
        this rule is not going to generalize well!
             Underfitting is usually much less of a problem in practice than overfit-
        ting. We can often cure underfitting just by using more training data. With
        more examples, the system can work out better rules for understanding
        each piece of data.


Detecting and Addressing Overfitting
        How do we know when we’ve started to overfit our data? Suppose that we’re
        using a validation set to estimate a system’s generalization error after each
        epoch (when we’re done training, as usual, we use the one-time test set to
        get a more reliable generalization error). The error made by the system
        in response to the validation data is called the validation error. It’s an esti-
        mate of the errors the system will make when it’s deployed, which is called
        the generalization error. When the validation error flattens out, or starts to
        become worse, while the training error is improving, we’re overfitting.
        That’s our cue to stop learning. Figure 9-1 shows the idea visually.


                                                                  Overfitting and Underfitting   197
                  Figure 9-1: The training and validation errors both go down steadily near the start of train-
                  ing, but after a certain point, the validation error starts to increase while the training error
                  continues to decrease, signaling overfitting.

                       In Figure 9-1, note that the training error continues to decrease as we
                  move into the zone of overfitting, where the validation error is going up.
                  That’s because we’re still learning from the training data, but now we’re
                  learning information specific to that data, rather than general rules. It’s the
                  performance on the validation set that lets us see that this is happening,
                  because our validation error (estimating our generalization error) is get-
                  ting worse. The longer we train like this, the worse our system will perform
                  when we deploy it.
                       Let’s see this in action. Suppose that a store’s owner subscribes to a
                  service that provides her with background music. The company provides
                  a variety of streams with music at different tempos, and they’ve given her
                  a control that lets her choose the tempo of the music at any time. Rather
                  than setting the tempo once at the start of the day and forgetting about it,
                  she’s been finding herself adjusting it frequently through the day, and it’s
                  become a distracting chore. She’s hired us to build a system that automati-
                  cally adjusts the music throughout the day, the way she wants it.
                       The first step is to gather data. So, the next morning, we sit across from
                  the controls and watch. Each time she adjusts the tempo, we note the time
                  and new setting. Our collected data are shown in Figure 9-2.




198   Chapter 9
Figure 9-2: Our recorded data shows the tempo chosen by our store owner each time she
adjusted it during the day.

    Back in our labs that evening, we fit a curve to the data, as in
Figure 9-3.




Figure 9-3: A curve to fit to the data of Figure 9-2




                                                            Overfitting and Underfitting   199
                      This curve is very wiggly, but we might reason that it’s a good solution,
                  because it does a good job of matching her recorded choices. The next
                  morning, we program the system to follow this pattern. By the middle of
                  the afternoon the owner is complaining because the tempo of the music is
                  changing too often and too dramatically. It’s distracting her customers.
                      This curve is overfitting the data as a result of matching the observed
                  values too precisely. Her choices on the day we measured the data were
                  based on the particular songs that were playing on that day. Because the
                  service doesn’t play the same songs at the same time every day, we don’t
                  want to reproduce the data from that one day’s observations so closely. By
                  accommodating every bump and wiggle, we’re paying too much attention
                  to the idiosyncrasies in the training data.
                      It would be great if we could watch her choices for several more days
                  and use all of that data to come up with a more general plan, but she
                  doesn’t want us taking up room in her store again. The data we have is all
                  we’re going to get. We want a schedule with less variation, so the next night
                  we reduce the accuracy of our match to the data. We aim for something
                  that doesn’t jump around as much as before and get the gentle curve of
                  Figure 9-4.




                  Figure 9-4: A gentle curve for matching our tempo data

                      We find the next day that our client still isn’t satisfied because this
                  curve is much too coarse and ignores important features like her desire to
                  use slower tempos in the morning and more upbeat songs in the afternoon.
                  This curve is underfitting the data.




200   Chapter 9
    What we want is a solution that’s not trying to match all of the data
exactly but is getting a good feeling for the general trends. We want some-
thing that’s not too precise a match, or too loose, but “ just right.” The next
day, we set up the system according to the curve in Figure 9-5.




Figure 9-5: A curve that matches our tempo data well enough, but not too well

     Our client is happy with this curve and the tempos of the songs it chooses
over the day. We’ve found a good compromise between underfitting and over-
fitting. In this example, finding the best curve was a matter of personal taste,
but later on we’ll see algorithmic ways to find this sweet spot between under-
fitting and overfitting.
     Figure 9-6 shows another example of overfitting, this time in classifying
two categories of two-dimensional (2D) points.




Figure 9-6: A likely case of overfitting. (Inspired by Bullinaria 2015.)

    On the left side of Figure 9-6, we have one circular point deep in
square territory, resulting in a complicated boundary curve. We call this
kind of isolated point an outlier, and it’s natural to treat it with suspicion.
Maybe this is the result of a measuring or recording error, or maybe it’s

                                                                   Overfitting and Underfitting   201
                  just one very unusual piece of perfectly valid data. Getting more data
                  would give us a better sense of which case describes this oddity, but if all
                  we have is this one set of data to work with, we need to decide what to do.
                  By drawing the boundary to accommodate this one data point, we risk
                  misclassifying some future data points as blue circles, even though they
                  were solidly inside the brown square region, because they landed on the
                  blue side of this strange boundary curve. It might be better to prefer a
                  simpler curve like that on the right of Figure 9-6, and accept this one
                  point as an error.
                       Now that we’ve seen what overfitting looks like, let’s look at how we can
                  prevent it from happening.

                  Early Stopping
                  Generally speaking, when we start training our model, we are underfitting.
                  The model won’t have seen enough examples yet to figure out how to han-
                  dle them properly, so its rules are general and vague.
                      As we train more and the model refines its boundaries, the train-
                  ing and validation errors both typically drop. To discuss this, let’s repeat
                  Figure 9-1 for convenience here as Figure 9-7.




                  Figure 9-7: A repeat of Figure 9-1 for convenience

                       At some point, we’ll find that although the training error is continu-
                  ing to drop, the validation error is starting to rise (it may go flat for a while
                  first). Now we’re overfitting. The training error is dropping because we’re


202   Chapter 9
getting more and more details right. But we’re now tuning our results too
much to the training data, and the generalization error (or its estimate, the
validation error) is going up.
     From this analysis we can come up with a good guiding principle: when
we start overfitting, stop training. That is, when we get to around 28 epochs in
Figure 9-7, and we find that the validation error is going up even as train-
ing error is dropping, we should stop training. This technique of ending
training just as the validation error starts to rise is called early stopping, since
we’re stopping our training process before the training error has reached
zero. It may be helpful to think of this idea as last-minute stopping, since
we’re training for as long as we can, only stopping when we’ve found the
best representation of our data without overfitting.
     In practice, our error measurements are rarely as smooth as the ide-
alized curves in Figure 9-7. They tend to be noisy and may even go the
“wrong” way for short periods, so it can be hard to find the exact right
place to stop. Most library functions for early stopping offer a few variables
that let us tell them to implicitly smooth out these error curves so they can
detect when the validation error really is rising and not just experiencing a
momentary increase.

Regularization
We always want to squeeze as much information as we can out of our train-
ing data, stopping just short of overfitting. Early stopping ends learning
when the validation error starts rising, but what if there was a way to delay
that phenomenon, so we can train longer and continue to push down both
training and validation errors?
     By analogy, consider cooking a turkey in the oven. If we just put the tur-
key in a pan and cook it on high heat, the outside eventually starts to burn.
But say we want to cook the turkey for longer, without burning it. One way
to do this is to wrap it in aluminum foil. The foil delays the onset of burn-
ing, letting us cook the turkey for longer.
     The techniques that delay the onset of overfitting are collectively
known as regularization methods, or simply regularization. Remember that the
computer doesn’t know that it’s overfitting. When we ask it to learn from
the training data, it learns from that data as well as it can. It doesn’t know
when it crosses the line from “good knowledge of the input data” to “overly
specific knowledge of this particular input data,” so it’s up to us to manage
the issue.
     A popular way to perform regularization, or delay the start of overfitting,
is to limit the values of the parameters used by the classifier. Conceptually,
the core argument for why this staves off overfitting is that by keeping all of
the parameters to small numbers, we prevent any one of them from dominat-
ing (Domke 2008). This makes it harder for the classifier to become depen-
dent on specialized, narrow idiosyncrasies.
     To see this, think back to our example of remembering people’s names.
When we memorized the name of Walter, who wore a walrus mustache, that



                                                          Overfitting and Underfitting   203
                   one piece of information dominated everything else we remembered. The
                   other facts we could have learned from looking at him included that he
                   was a man, he was almost six feet tall, he had long gray hair, he had a big
                   smile and a low voice, he wore a dark-red shirt with brown buttons, and so
                   on. But instead, we focused on his mustache, and ignored all these other
                   useful cues. Later, when we saw a completely different person with a walrus
                   mustache, that one feature dominated all the others and we mistook that
                   person for Walter.
                        If we force all of the features we notice to have values in roughly the
                   same range, then “has a walrus mustache” doesn’t get the chance to domi-
                   nate, and the other features continue to matter when we remember the
                   name of a new person. Regularization techniques make sure that no one
                   parameter, or no small set of parameters, dominates all the others.
                        Note that we’re not trying to set all the parameters to the same value,
                   which would make them useless. We’re just trying to make sure they’re all
                   in roughly the same range. Pushing the parameters down to small values
                   allows us to learn longer and extract more information from our training
                   data before overfitting occurs.
                        The best amount of regularization to apply varies from one learner and
                   dataset to the next, so we usually have to try out a few values and see what
                   works best. We specify the amount of regularization to apply with a hyper-
                   parameter that’s traditionally written as a lowercase Greek λ (lambda),
                   though sometimes other letters are used. Most commonly, larger values of λ
                   mean more regularization.
                        Keeping the parameter values small also usually means that the clas-
                   sifier’s boundary curves don’t get as complex and wiggly as they otherwise
                   could. We can use the regularization parameter λ to choose how complex we
                   want our boundary to be. High values give us smooth boundaries, whereas
                   low values let the boundary fit more precisely to the data it’s looking at.
                        In later chapters we’ll work with learning architectures that have mul-
                   tiple layers of processing. Such systems can use additional, specialized
                   regularization techniques called dropout, batchnorm, layer norm, and weight
                   regularization that can help control overfitting on those types of architec-
                   tures. All of these methods are designed to prevent any elements of the net-
                   work from dominating the results.


      Bias and Variance
                   The statistical terms bias and variance are intimately related to underfitting
                   and overfitting, and often they come up when those topics are discussed.
                   We can say that bias measures the tendency of a system to consistently learn
                   the wrong things, and variance measures its tendency to learn irrelevant
                   details (Domingos 2015). Another way to think of these is that a large
                   amount of bias means that a system is prejudiced toward a particular kind
                   of result, and a large amount of variance means that the answers returned
                   by the system are too specific to the data.



204    Chapter 9
    We’re going to take a graphical approach to these two ideas by discuss-
ing them in terms of 2D curves. These curves might be the solutions to a
regression problem, like our earlier task of setting the tempo for a store’s
background music over time. Or the curves could be the boundary curves
between two regions of the plane, as in a classification problem. The ideas
of bias and variance are not limited to any one type of algorithm, or to 2D
data. But we’ll stick to 2D curves because we can draw and interpret them.
Let’s focus on finding a good fit to an underlying noisy curve and see how
the ideas of bias and variance let us describe how our algorithms behave.

Matching the Underlying Data
Let’s suppose that an atmospheric researcher friend of ours has come to us
for some help. She’s measured the wind speed at a certain spot at the top of
a mountain, at the same time, every day, for several months. Her measured
data is in Figure 9-8.




Figure 9-8: Wind speed over time as measured by an atmospheric scientist. In this data
there’s a clear underlying curve, but there’s also plenty of noise (base curve inspired by
Macskassy 2008).

    She believes that the data she’s measured is the sum of an idealized
curve, which is the same from year to year, and noise, which accounts for
unpredictable day-to-day fluctuations. The data she measured is called
a noisy curve, since it’s the sum of the idealized curve and the noise.
Figure 9-9 shows the idealized curve and the noise that, when added
together, make Figure 9-8.




                                                                 Overfitting and Underfitting   205
Figure 9-9: The data from Figure 9-8 split into two pieces. Left: The underlying “idealized” curve we seek.
Right: The noise that nature added to the idealized curve to give us the noisy, measured data. Note that the
two graphs have different vertical scales.

                       Our atmospheric researcher believes that she has a good model for
                   describing the noise (maybe it follows the uniform or Gaussian distribu-
                   tions we saw in Chapter 2). But her description of the noise is statistical,
                   so she can’t use it to fix her day-to-day measurements. In other words, if
                   she knew the exact values of the noise on the right of Figure 9-9, she could
                   subtract them from the measurements in Figure 9-8 to get at her goal, the
                   clean curve on the left of Figure 9-9. But she doesn’t know those noise val-
                   ues. She has a statistical model that can generate lots of curves like those
                   on the right of Figure 9-9, but she doesn’t have the specific values that cor-
                   respond to her data.
                       Here’s one approach to cleaning up the noisy data. We can go back to
                   the noisy data in Figure 9-8 and try to fit a smooth curve to it (Bishop 2006).
                   By choosing the complexity of the curve to be wiggly enough to follow the
                   data, but not so wiggly that it tries to match each point exactly, we hope to
                   get a pretty fair match to the general shape of the curve, which is a good
                   starting point for finding the underlying smooth curve.
                       There are many ways to fit a smooth curve to noisy data. Figure 9-10
                   shows one such curve. The little wiggle at the right end is typical of the sort
                   of curve we used, which tends to jump around a bit near the edges of the
                   dataset.
                       That doesn’t look too far off. But can we do better?
                       Let’s apply the ideas of bias and variance to the problem of finding
                   the idealized curve. The idea is inspired by the method of bootstrapping
                   that we discussed in Chapter 2, but we won’t actually use the bootstrapping
                   technique.



206    Chapter 9
Figure 9-10: Fitting our noisy data with a curve using a curve-fitting algorithm

    Let’s make 50 versions of the original noisy data, but each version con-
tains just 30 points selected randomly, without replacement. The first five of
these reduced datasets are shown in Figure 9-11.




Figure 9-11: Five of the 50 smaller versions of our noisy starting data. Each version con-
sists of 30 samples chosen from the original data without replacement. These are the first
five versions, with the chosen points shown as green dots, and the original, noisy data
shown in gray for reference.

    Let’s try matching each of these sets of points with simple curves
and then complex curves, and compare the results in terms of bias and
variance.

High Bias, Low Variance
We’ll first fit our data with simple, smooth curves. Because we’ve selected
these qualities ahead of time, we expect that all of our resulting curves will
look about the same. The curves that fit our five sets of data in Figure 9-11
are shown in Figure 9-12.


                                                                 Overfitting and Underfitting   207
                  Figure 9-12: Fitting simple curves to our first five sets of points in Figure 9-11

                       As expected, the curves are all simple and similar. Because these curves
                  are very similar to one another, we say that this collection of curves is show-
                  ing a high bias. The bias here refers to the predetermined preference for a
                  simple shape. Because the curves are so simple, each one lacks the flexibil-
                  ity to pass through more than a few of its points at the most.
                       The variance refers to how much the curves vary, or differ, from one to
                  the next. To see the variance of these high-bias curves, we can draw all 50
                  curves on top of one another, as in Figure 9-13.




                  Figure 9-13: The curves for all 50 of our 30-point samples from
                  the original data, overlaid on one another

                      As expected, the curves are quite similar. We say that they demonstrate
                  low variance.
                      To sum up, this collection of curves has a high bias, because they all
                  have about the same shape, and a low variance, because the individual
                  curves aren’t being influenced much by the data.



208   Chapter 9
                    Low Bias, High Variance
                    Now let’s try reducing our constraint that the curves need to be simple. That
                    lets us fit complex curves to our data, so that each one comes closer to
                    matching its green points. Figure 9-14 shows these curves applied to our
                    first five sets of data. Compared to Figure 9-12, these curves are much wig-
                    glier, with multiple hills and valleys. Though they still don’t pass directly
                    through too many points, they come a lot closer to them.




                    Figure 9-14: The complex curves created for the first five sets of points from our noisy data

                         Since the shapes of these curves are more complex and flexible, they’re
                    more influenced by the data than by any starting assumptions. Because
                    we are placing fewer constraints on the curve shapes, we say that the col-
                    lection has low bias. On the other hand, they’re quite different from one
                    another. We can see this by drawing all 50 curves on top of one another,
                    as shown in Figure 9-15. Because the curves veer off wildly at the start and
                    end, we also show an expanded vertical scale that covers those big swings.




Figure 9-15: The complex curves fit to our 50 sets of data. The plot on the right shows the entire vertical scale
of the curves.


                                                                                     Overfitting and Underfitting   209
                      These curves don’t all follow the same shape, so they have low bias.
                  Furthermore, they are quite different from one another, and each is
                  strongly influenced by its data, so the collection has high variance.

                  Comparing Curves
                  Let’s recap our curve fitting experiment so far.
                       Our atmospheric scientist asked us for a curve that matches the under-
                  lying idealized curve in her data. We created 50 small sets of points, ran-
                  domly extracted from her original, noisy data. When we fit simple, smooth
                  curves to those sets of points, the curves consistently missed most of the
                  data points. That set of curves had a high bias, or a predisposition to a par-
                  ticular result (smooth and simple). The curves were not much influenced
                  by the data they were intended to match, so that set of curves had a low
                  variance.
                       On the other hand, when we fit complex and wiggly curves to these sets
                  of points, the curves were able to fit to the data and came much closer to
                  most of the points. Because they were influenced more by the data than by
                  any predisposition to a particular shape, that set of curves had a low bias.
                  But the adaptability of the curves means that they were all significantly
                  different from one another. In other words, that set of curves had a high
                  variance.
                       So, the first set had high bias and low variance, and the second set has
                  low bias and high variance.
                       Ideally, we’d like curves with a low bias (so we’re not imposing our
                  preconceived ideas on their possible shapes), and low variance (so our dif-
                  ferent curves all create roughly the same match to the original, noisy data).
                  Unfortunately, in most real situations, as either measure goes down, the
                  other goes up. This means it’s up to us to find the best bias-variance tradeoff
                  for each specific situation. We’ll come back to this issue in a moment.
                       Notice that bias and variance are properties of families, or collections,
                  of curves. It doesn’t make sense to discuss the bias and variance of a single
                  curve. Bias and variance often come up in machine learning discussions as
                  ways to describe the complexity or power of a model or algorithm.
                       We can now see how bias and variance help us describe underfitting
                  and overfitting. In the beginning of training, as the system tries to find
                  the right way to represent the training data, it’s producing general rules,
                  or underfitting. If these rules are boundaries between classes of data, they
                  have the form of curves. If we train on multiple similar but different data­
                  sets, we’ll see curves that are simple in shape and like one another. That is,
                  they have high bias and low variance.
                       Later in training, the curves for each dataset are more complicated.
                  There are fewer preconditions on their shape, so they have low bias, and
                  they can closely match the training data, so they have high variance. When
                  we let a system train for too long, the high-variance curves start following
                  the input data too tightly, causing overfitting.
                       Figure 9-16 shows the tradeoff of bias and variance graphically.



210   Chapter 9
Figure 9-16: Top row: Four curves we’d like to match. Middle row: Using curves with high
bias and low variance. Bottom row: Curves with low bias and high variance. The far-right
image in the bottom two rows shows the four curves superimposed.

     In the middle row, high bias gives us nice, simple curves (which avoid
overfitting), but their low variance means they can’t match the data very
well. In the bottom row, low bias lets the curves better match the data, but
their high variance means that the curves can match too well (which risks
overfitting).
     In general, neither bias nor variance is inherently better or worse than
the other, so we shouldn’t always be tempted to find, say, the solution with
the lowest possible bias or variance. In some applications, high bias or high
variance may be acceptable. For instance, if we know that our training set
is absolutely representative of all future data, then we don’t care about the
variance and instead aim for the lowest possible bias, since matching that
training set perfectly is just what we want. On the other hand, if we know
that our training set is not a good representative of future data (but it’s the
best we have at the moment), we may not care about bias, since matching
this lousy dataset isn’t important, but we want the lowest variance we can
get so that we have the best chance of at least doing something reasonable
on future data.
     In general, we need to find the right balance between these two mea-
sures in a way that works best for the goals of any particular project, given
the specific algorithm and data we’re working with.




                                                              Overfitting and Underfitting   211
      Fitting a Line with Bayes’ Rule
                   Bias and variance are a useful way to characterize how well a family of
                   curves fits their data. Recalling our discussion of the frequentist and
                   Bayesian philosophies from Chapter 4, we can say that bias and variance
                   are inherently frequentist ideas. That’s because the notions of bias and vari-
                   ance rely on drawing multiple values from a source of data. We don’t rely
                   too much on any single curve. Instead, we use averaging of all the curves
                   to find the “true” answer that each curve approximates. Those ideas fit the
                   frequentist approach very well.
                        By contrast, the Bayesian approach to fitting data asserts that the
                   results can only be described in a probabilistic way. We list out all the ways
                   to match our data that we think are possible and attach a probability to
                   each one. As we gather more data, we gradually eliminate some of those
                   descriptions and thereby make the remaining ones more probable, but we
                   never get to a single, absolute answer.
                        Let’s see this in practice. Our discussion is based on a visualization
                   from Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Bishop 2006). We’ll use
                   Bayes’ Rule to find a nice approximation of the noisy data atmospheric data
                   we saw in Figure 9-8. Rather than fit a complicated curve to our data, we
                   restrict ourselves to straight lines. That’s only because doing so lets us show
                   everything with 2D plots and diagrams. In fact, we stick to lines that are
                   mostly horizontal. Again, this is just so we can draw nice diagrams that don’t
                   require higher dimensions.
                        The method for curve fitting with Bayes’ Rule can use complex curves,
                   or sheets in space, or even shapes with hundreds of dimensions. We will use
                   straight lines that are mosty horizontal only because that choice keeps the
                   pictures simple.
                        We’ll be working with multiple lines at once, so it would be great to find
                   a compact way to represent different groups of lines without drawing them
                   all.
                        The trick will be to describe every line with two numbers. The first tells
                   us how much the line is tilted from being perfectly horizontal, which gives
                   us a line in any orientation. The second number tells us how much to move
                   the line up and down.
                        The first number is the slope. A horizontal line has a slope of 0. As the
                   line rotates clockwise, as in Figure 9-17, the slope increases. As the line
                   rotates counterclockwise, the slope decreases.
                        When the line is perfectly diagonal, the slope is either 1 or –1. As it
                   rotates to steeper orientations, the slope increases quickly until it reaches
                   infinity for a perfectly vertical line. We can take steps to avoid this problem,
                   but it only makes the discussion more complicated. So for the sake of sim-
                   plicity, we will limit our attention to lines that have a slope between –2 and
                   2, which lie in the green zone in Figure 9-17.




212    Chapter 9
                   Slope = 2
                                   Slope = 1


                                   Slope = 0.5

                                   Slope = 0

                                   Slope = –0.5


                                   Slope = –1
                  Slope = –2
Figure 9-17: A horizontal line has a slope of 0. As the line rotates
counterclockwise, the slope increases. As it rotates clockwise, the slope
decreases. We will only use lines with slopes that fall in the light-green region.

     The second number that describes a line is the Y intercept. This merely
moves the whole line up or down as a whole. This number tells us the value
of the line when X is zero. In other words, it’s the value of the line as it
crosses, or intercepts, the Y axis. Figure 9-18 illustrates the idea. Again for
simplicity we’ll restrict our focus to lines with a Y intercept in the range
[–2, 2], tinted green in Figure 9-18.
 4                                      Y intercept 2                                             4
 3                                      Y intercept 1                                             3
 2                                      Y intercept 0                                             2
 1                                      Y intercept –1                                            1
 0                                      Y intercept –2                                            0
–1                                                                                              –1
–2                                                                                              –2
–3                                                                                              –3
–4                                                                                              –4
  –4 –3 –2 –1 0        1   2   3    4                    –4 –3 –2 –1 0      1    2     3    4

Figure 9-18: The Y intercept tells us the Y value of the line when it crosses the Y axis,
regardless of its slope. We’ll just use lines that have a Y intercept between –2 and 2.

     Given any line, we can measure its orientation to get a value for its slope,
and observe where it crosses the Y axis to get the value of the Y intercept.
That’s everything we need to describe the line. We can show this as a point in
a new 2D grid where the axes are labeled slope and Y intercept. Let’s call this an
SI diagram, standing for slope-intercept. A normal diagram will be just an XY
diagram. We can also say that the SI diagram plots lines in SI space, and the
XY diagram shows lines in XY space (also called Cartesian space).
     Figure 9-19 shows a few lines in both XY and SI diagrams.
     Mathematicians call these two ways of looking at the same thing a dual
representation, and there’s a lot to be said about such things. We’ll stick to
just what we need for our discussion of fitting a line using Bayes’ Rule.

                                                                   Overfitting and Underfitting       213
                  Figure 9-19: Left: Three lines in XY space. Right: Each line drawn as a dot in SI space.

                      Something interesting happens when we arrange a set of points in SI
                  space along a line. When we draw their corresponding lines in XY space,
                  they all meet at the same XY point. Figure 9-20 shows this in action. This is
                  true any time our SI points lie on a line.




                  Figure 9-20: Two examples of placing dots in SI space along a line. Their corresponding
                  lines will always meet at a single point in XY space.



214   Chapter 9
     As we look for the best line to fit our data, we know it probably won’t be
able to go through all the points. But we’d like it to come close. So instead
of placing dots in SI space, let’s assign every possible line a probability from
0 to 1, indicating how likely it is to be the line we’re looking for. Figure 9-21
shows the idea (in Figure 9-21, and the figures to come, we scale up the
probability values as needed so that they’re easier to read).




Figure 9-21: Left: A point in XY space. Middle: Every point in the SI graph is assigned a
probability from 0 to 1 (blue to purple), telling us how close that line comes to the point.
We show some representative lines with black dots. Right: The black dots in the middle
figure drawn as their lines in XY space. Note that they all pass through our original red
dot, or come close to it.

     Let’s now return to the problem we want to solve: finding the best
straight line approximation for a noisy set of data. Let’s start with an arbi-
trary, broad Gaussian bump in SI space as a prior, as in the top left of
Figure 9-22. This says that any line might be our answer, but those in the
bright purple region are the most likely. We’ve chosen some points in this
graph according to their probabilities, and drawn them in the upper right.
We’re getting a lot of very different lines, confirming our very vague prior
when it comes to choosing lines.




                                                                  Overfitting and Underfitting   215
                  Figure 9-22: Top left: A prior in SI space, along with some points chosen from that prob-
                  ability distribution. Top right: Those points drawn as lines in XY space. Second and third
                  rows: Like the top row, but with smaller priors.

                      We can see in Figure 9-22 that as the prior becomes smaller, we get a
                  more refined choice of lines. So we’d hope that Bayes’ Rule will follow this
                  kind of change, and give us a small posterior (or prior) resulting in a small
                  collection of lines that can fit our data.
                      Now we’re ready to use Bayes’ Rule to match our data! Figure 9-23
                  shows the process.


216   Chapter 9
Figure 9-23: Fitting a straight line through our data with Bayes’ Rule (figure inspired by
Bishop 2006)

                                                                  Overfitting and Underfitting   217
                        Let’s walk through what’s happening in Figure 9-23 row by row. In
                  row 1, we show our prior, or our starting guess of the distribution of straight
                  lines that will fit our data. We arbitrarily chose a Gaussian with its center
                  in the middle. This prior means that we’re guessing that our data is mostly
                  likely fit by a straight line that is horizontal and has a Y intercept of 0. That
                  is, it’s the X axis itself. But the Gaussian goes all the way out to the edges (it
                  doesn’t quite reach 0 anywhere in the diagram), so any of our available lines
                  are possible. We could look at the data and pick a better starting prior, but
                  this one is simple and, because it has at least some probability for every line
                  we’ll consider as a candidate, it’s an acceptable start.
                        The image on the right of row 1 shows 20 lines picked at random from
                  this prior, with more probable lines being more likely to be picked.
                        The left image in row 2 shows our noisy dataset, and a point picked at
                  random, shown in red. The likelihood diagram for all lines that go through
                  (or near) that point is shown to its right. Now we apply Bayes’ Rule, and
                  multiply the prior in row 1 by the likelihood in row 2.
                        The result is the left figure in row 3. This is the posterior, or the result
                  of multiplying each point in the prior (how likely we thought that line was),
                  with the corresponding point in the new point’s likelihood (how likely it is
                  that each line fits this piece of data). We’re not showing the Bayes’ Rule step
                  of dividing by the evidence because we’re scaling our pictures to span the
                  whole range of colors, so this is really a scaled version of the posterior. For
                  simplicity, let’s refer to it as the posterior anyway.
                        Notice that the posterior on line 3 is a new 2D distribution, repre-
                  sented by a new blob. To its right we see another 20 lines drawn at random
                  from that distribution. We can see a big empty space near the top of the
                  figure that wasn’t there in row 1. The system has learned from this one step
                  of Bayes’ Rule that none of the lines that pass through that space are likely
                  to match the data we’ve seen. The posterior from line 3 becomes our new
                  prior for the next data point that comes along.
                        In row 4 we pick a new data point from the input, again shown in red.
                  To its right is the likelihood for lines with respect to this point. In row 5 we
                  apply Bayes’ Rule again and multiply our prior (the posterior from line 3)
                  with the likelihood from row 4 to get a new posterior. Notice that the poste-
                  rior has shrunk in size, telling us that the collection of lines that probably
                  fit both points is smaller than the collection that fits just the first one. To
                  the right, we show lines drawn from this distribution. Notice how much
                  they’ve grouped together in the same general direction as the two points we
                  just learned from.
                        We repeat the process again with a new point and likelihood in line 6,
                  and a new posterior and set of lines in line 7. The lines from this posterior
                  are looking very similar, and the trend seems to be approaching a good fit
                  to our data. By using more and more points, we get an increasingly limited
                  range of probable lines.
                        We can see from this example why Bayes’ Rule is so useful in training a
                  learning system. Think of our training data as the points on the curve, and




218   Chapter 9
      the evolving prior as the output from our system. As we provide the system
      with more samples (in this case, points), the system is able to fine-tune itself
      to deliver the response we’re looking for.
           It might be tempting to look at the lines in the bottom right of Figure 9-21
      and apply our ideas of bias and variance to them, but that’s not thinking
      like a Bayesian. In the Bayesian framework, these aren’t a family of lines
      that approximate some true answer that we can discover by using various
      forms of averaging. Instead, a Bayesian sees all of these lines as accurate
      and correct, but with different probabilities. Computing the bias and vari-
      ance of lines drawn from this collection is possible, but not meaningful in
      a Bayesian sense.
           Both the frequentist and Bayesian approaches let us fit lines (or curves)
      to data. They just take very different attitudes and use different mecha-
      nisms, giving us two different ways to find good answers to our problem.


Summary
      In this chapter, we looked at a few ways in which a learning system can fail
      to generalize. When a learning system underperforms because the curves
      are not good fits to the data, we are underfitting. When a learning system
      underperforms on new data, but excels on the training data, we are over-
      fitting: the system has learned too many of the quirks and idiosyncrasies
      of the training data. We saw how we can prevent overfitting by watching
      training and validation performance and using regularization methods.
      We ended the chapter by considering bias and variance’s relationship to
      overfitting, and seeing how we can fit a straight line to noisy data using
      Bayes’ Rule.
           In the next chapter, we’ll look at data and how we can properly prepare
      it for our learning systems.




                                                               Overfitting and Underfitting   219
