                   gradients on the pixels, causing them to excite the filters even more, and
                   around it goes, with the picture changing more and more each time we
                   repeat the loop.
                       Since this is an artistic process, we usually watch the output after every
                   update (or every few updates), and stop it when we like what we’re seeing.

                   Running Deep Dreaming
                   Let’s put this algorithm to work, using the frog in Figure 23-3 as our start-
                   ing point.




                   Figure 23-3: A calm and thoughtful frog

                        Figure 23-4 shows some “dreams” from our frog image, using some fil-
                   ters (and weights on them) that we chose by trial and error.




                   Figure 23-4: Some deep dream results from the starting frog image (in the upper-left corner)



678   Chapter 23
     We’re seeing lots of eyes in Figure 23-4 because some of our selected
filters responded to eyes. If we had selected filters that responded to, say,
horses and shoes, then we would expect to see lots of horses and shoes in
our images.
     Figure 23-5 shows the results starting from an image of a dog. The
changes to the image are mostly of a finer texture because the dog image is
about 1,000 pixels on each side, more than four times the size of the images
that the network trained on. The image in the lower-right used a version
of the dog image that was scaled to the same size as the network’s training
data, 224 by 224.




Figure 23-5: Deep dreaming about a dog

    The original name for this technique was inceptionism (Mordvintsev,
Olah, and Tyka 2015) in honor of the movie Inception, but it has come to be
more frequently known as deep dreaming. The name is a poetic suggestion
that the network is “dreaming” about the original image, and the image
we get back shows us where the network’s dream went. Deep dreaming
has become popular not only because of the wild images it creates, but
because it’s not hard to implement using modern deep learning libraries
(Bonaccorso 2020).
    Many variations on this basic algorithm have been explored (Tyka
2015), but they only scratch the surface. We can imagine schemes to auto-
matically determine the weights on the layers or even apply weights to the
individual filters on each layer. We can “mask” the activation maps before

                                                         Creative Applications   679
                    we add them up so that some areas (like the background) are ignored, or
                    we can mask the updates to the pixels so that some pixels in the original
                    image are not changed at all in response to one set of layer outputs, but are
                    instead allowed to change a lot in response to some other set of layer out-
                    puts. We can even apply different combinations of layers and weights to dif-
                    ferent regions of the input image. The deep dreaming approach to making
                    art has lots of room left for new discoveries.
                         There’s no “right” or “best” way to do deep dreaming. It’s a creative
                    exercise in which we follow our aesthetics, hunches, or wild guesses to hunt
                    for images that appeal to us. It can be hard to predict what’s going to come
                    out from any particular combination of network, layers, and weights, so the
                    process rewards patience and a lot of experimenting.


      Neural Style Transfer
                    We can use a variation on the deep dreaming technique to do something
                    remarkable: transfer one artist’s style onto another image. This process is
                    called neural style transfer.

                    Representing Style
                    Cultures often celebrate the idiosyncratic visual style of artists. Let’s focus
                    on paintings. What characterizes the style of a painting? That’s a big ques-
                    tion, because “style” can include someone’s world view, which influences
                    choices as diverse as their subject matter, composition, materials, and
                    tools. Let’s focus strictly on visual appearance. Even narrowed down this
                    way, it’s hard to precisely identify what “style” means for a painting, but we
                    might say that it refers to how colors and shapes are used to create forms,
                    and the types and distributions of those forms across the canvas (Art Story
                    Foundation 2020; Wikipedia 2020).
                          Rather than try to refine this description, let’s see if we can find some-
                    thing that seems like it’s in the ballpark, while also being something we can
                    formalize in terms of the layers and filters of a deep convolutional network.
                          Our goal in this section is to take a picture we want to modify, called
                    the base image, and a second picture whose style we want to match, called the
                    style reference. For example, our frog could be our base image, and any paint-
                    ing could be the style reference. We want to use these to create a new image,
                    called the generated image, which has the content of the base image expressed
                    in the style of the style reference.
                          To get started, we will make an assertion that comes out of nowhere. We
                    say that we can characterize the style of an image (such as a painting) by
                    looking at the layer activations it produces and finding pairs of layers that
                    activate in roughly the same way. This idea comes from a seminal paper
                    published in 2015 (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2015). Without getting into the
                    details, the process begins by running the style reference through a deep
                    convolutional network. As with deep dreaming, we ignore its output, and
                    instead focus on just the convolution filters.


680    Chapter 23
     All of the activation maps in a given layer have the same size, so we can
easily compare them to one another. Let’s start with the first activation map
in a layer (that is, the first filter’s output). We can compare that to the acti-
vation map produced by the second filter and produce a score for the pair.
If the two maps are very similar (that is, the filters are firing in the same
places), we assign the pair a high score, and if the maps are very different,
we give that pair a low score. We then compare the first map to the third
map and compute their score, then compare the first and the fourth map,
compute their score, and so on. Then we can start with the second map and
compare it to every other map in the layer. We can organize the results in
a grid, with as many cells on each side as there are filters in the layer. The
value in each cell of the grid tells us the score for that pair of layers. This
grid is called a Gram matrix. Let’s make one such Gram matrix for every
layer.
     Now we can restate our notion of style more formally: the style of an
image is represented by the Gram matrices for all the layers. That is, each
style produces its own particular form of Gram matrices.
     Let’s see if this claim is true. Figure 23-6 shows a famous self-portrait
by Pablo Picasso from 1907. There’s a ton of style here, such as big blocks of
color and thick dark lines. Let’s run this through VGG16 and save the Gram
matrix at each layer. We’ll call those the style matrices, and save them as the
representation of the style for this image.




Figure 23-6: A 1907 self-portrait by Pablo Picasso

     If the Gram matrices represent style, then we can use them to modify a
starting image of random noise. We run the noisy input image through the
network and compute its Gram matrices, which we call the image matrices.
If the style matrices really do somehow represent the style of the Picasso
image, then if we can change the colors of the pixels in the noisy image
so that eventually the image matrices come close to the style matrices, the
noisy image should take on the style of the painting.
     Let’s do just that. We’ll run the noise through the network, compute
the image matrix at each layer, and compare that to the style matrix we
saved for that layer. We’ll add up the differences between these two matri-
ces so the more different they are, the bigger the result. Then we’ll add

                                                            Creative Applications   681
                   together these differences for all the layers, and this is the error for our net-
                   work. As with deep dreaming, we use this error to compute the gradients
                   for the entire network, including the pixels at the start, but we only modify
                   the colors of the pixels. Unlike deep dreaming, our goal now is to minimize
                   the error, and thereby change the pixels so that their colors produce Gram
                   matrices that are like those of the style reference.
                        Figure 23-7 shows the result of this process. For this visualization, we
                   computed each layer’s error as the sum of the differences of all the matrices
                   in all layers up to and including that layer.

                                      Conv 1                   Conv 2                   Conv 3

                   Block 1



                   Block 2



                   Block 3



                   Block 4



                   Block 5

                   Figure 23-7: The result of getting noise to match the Gram matrices in VGG16

                        This is remarkable. By the time we get to the three convolution layers
                   in Block 3, we’re generating abstracts that are very similar to our original
                   style reference in Figure 23-6. The splotches of color show similar gradual
                   changes in color. There are dark lines between some regions of different
                   colors, and we can even see brushstroke textures.
                        The Gram matrices have indeed captured the style of Picasso’s paint-
                   ing. But why? The anticlimactic answer is that nobody really knows (Li et
                   al. 2017). We have different ways to write down the mathematics of what
                   the Gram matrices are measuring, but that doesn’t help us understand why
                   this technique captures this elusive idea we call style. Neither the original
                   paper on neural style transfer (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2015), nor a some-
                   what more detailed follow-up (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016) explains
                   how the authors hit on this idea or why it works so well.

682   Chapter 23
Representing Content
In deep dreaming, we started with an image and manipulated it by chang-
ing its pixels. If we try the same thing with neural transfer and start with an
image rather than noise, the image quickly gets lost. The effect of minimiz-
ing the differences between the Gram matrices causes big changes to the
input image, moving it toward the style we want, but losing the content of
the image in the process.
     A solution to this problem is to still start with noise, because it works
so well (as shown by Figure 23-7), but retain the essence of the original
image by adding a second error term. In addition to imposing a style loss
that punishes the input for being a poor match to the style reference (as
measured by the difference in the Gram matrices), we also impose a con-
tent loss that punishes the input for being too much unlike the base image
(the picture we want to stylize). By starting with noise and adding together
these two error terms (usually with different emphasis), we cause the pix-
els in the noise to change so that they simultaneously more closely match
the colors of the picture we want to modify and the style in which we want
it to be shown.
     Gathering the content loss is easy. We take our base image, like our frog
in Figure 23-3, and run it through the network. Then we save the activa-
tion map of every filter. From then on, any time we feed a new image to the
network, the content loss is just the difference between the filter responses
for that input and the responses we got from our base image. After all, if all
the filters respond to an input the same way as the starting image, then the
input is the starting image (or something very close to it).

Style and Content Together
To recap, we feed our style reference through the network and save the
Gram matrix for every pair of filters after each layer. Next, we find a base
picture we’d like to stylize, run that through the network, and save the fea-
ture maps produced by every filter.
     Using this saved data, we can create a stylized version of our picture. We
start with noise and feed it to the network. The block diagram of the whole
process is shown in Figure 23-8.
     Let’s start with the content loss. In the light blue rounded-corner rect-
angle at the far left, we gather up the feature maps from the filters on the
first convolution layer and compute the difference between these maps and
the ones we saved from the base image (such as the frog). We do the same
with the feature maps from the second convolution layer. We can do this for
all the layers, but for this figure and the examples that follow we stopped
after two (this is another personal choice, guided by experimentation).
We add together all of these differences, or content losses, and scale their
sum by some value that lets us control how much the content of the pic-
ture should influence the changes we ultimately make to the colors of the
input image.



                                                           Creative Applications   683
             Build matrix                Build matrix   Build matrix     Build matrix   Build matrix




Difference    Difference    Difference    Difference     Difference       Difference     Dfference




 Content                                                               Style
  weight                                                               weight




Figure 23-8: A block diagram of neural style transfer

                           Now we address the style. For each layer, in the light yellow rounded-
                      corner rectangles, we compute the Gram matrix that tells us how much
                      each filter’s output corresponds with every other filter’s output. We then
                      compare those matrices with the style matrices we saved earlier. We add up
                      all of these differences to get the style loss and scale them by some value
                      that let us control how much influence the style has when we modify the
                      pixel colors.
                           The sum of the content and style losses is our error. As with deep
                      dreaming, we compute the gradients throughout the network and all the
                      way back to the pixels. And again, we leave the weights in the network
                      untouched. Unlike deep dreaming, we modify the values of the pixels to
                      minimize this total error, because we want the input to match the content




684    Chapter 23
                    and style information we previously saved. The result is that the original
                    noise slowly changes so that it is simultaneously more like the original
                    image and also has the filter relationships of the style.
                        As with deep dreaming, implementing neural style transfer is straightfor-
                    ward with modern deep learning libraries (Chollet 2017; Majumdar 2020).

                    Running Style Transfer
                    Let’s see how well this works in practice. We again used VGG16 as our net-
                    work and followed the process summarized in Figure 23-8.
                        Figure 23-9 shows nine images, each with a distinctive style. These are
                    our style references.




Figure 23-9: Nine images with different styles, which serve as our style references. From left to right and top
down, they are Starry Night, by Vincent van Gogh, The Shipwreck of the Minotaur, by J. M. W. Turner, The
Scream, by Edvard Munch, Seated Female Nude, by Pablo Picasso, Self-Portrait 1907, by Pablo Picasso,
Nighthawks, by Edward Hopper, Sergeant Croce, by the author, Water Lilies, Yellow and Lilac, by Claude
Monet, and Composition VII by Wassily Kandinsky.




                                                                                         Creative Applications   685
                        Let’s apply these styles to our old friend the frog. Figure 23-10 shows
                    the results.




Figure 23-10: Applying the nine styles in Figure 23-9 to a photograph of a frog (top)

                        Wow. That worked great. These images bear close examination,
                    because they have a lot of detail. At a first glance, we can see that the color
                    palette of each style reference has been transferred to the frog photo. But
                    notice the textures and edges, and how blocks of color are shaped. These
                    images are not just color shifted frogs, or some kind of overlay or blend of
                    two images. Instead, these are high-quality, detailed images of the frog in
                    the different styles. To see this more clearly, Figure 23-11 shows the same
                    zoomed-in region from each frog.
                        These images are significantly different, and all match the style they’re
                    based on.
                        Let’s see another example. Figure 23-12 shows our styles applied to a
                    photograph of a town.




686    Chapter 23
Figure 23-11: Details for the nine styled frogs of Figure 23-10

                         These images are all the more remarkable when we remember that every
                    one of them started out as random noise. For each image, we weighted the
                    content loss by 0.025 and the style loss by 1, so the style had 40 times more
                    influence on the changes to the pixels than the content did. In these exam-
                    ples, a little bit of content went a long way.
                         As Figures 23-10 through 23-12 show, the basic algorithm of neural
                    style transfer produces terrific results. The technique has been extended
                    and modified in many ways to improve the flexibility of the algorithm, the
                    types of results it produces, and the range of control that artists can apply
                    to create the results they want (Jing et al. 2018). It’s even been applied
                    to video and spherical images that completely surround a viewer (Ruder,
                    Dosovitskiy, and Brox 2018).
                         As with deep dreaming, neural style transfer is a general algorithm that
                    allows for a lot of variation and exploration. There are surely many interest-
                    ing and beautiful artistic effects waiting to be discovered.




                                                                              Creative Applications   687
Figure 23-12: Applying our nine styles of Figure 23-9 to a photograph of a town seen from above (top)



      Generating More of This Book
                    Just for fun, we ran the text of the first edition of this book (except for this
                    section) through an RNN that generates new text word by word, as dis-
                    cussed in Chapter 19. The full text contained about 427,000 words, drawn
                    from a vocabulary of about 10,300 words. To learn this text, we used a net-
                    work built from two layers of LSTMs, with 128 cells each.
                         The algorithm develops its output autoregressively, by finding the next
                    most likely word based on the text it has created so far, then the next most
                    likely word, then the next, and so on, until we stop it. Generating text this




688    Chapter 23
way is like the game of creating messages by repeatedly choosing just one
of the three or four words suggested by a cell phone when you are typing a
text (Lowensohn 2014).
     Here are a few sentences manually selected from the output after
250 iterations. They are included here exactly as generated, including
punctuation.

•   The responses of the samples in all the red circles share two numbers, like
    the bottom of the last step, when their numbers would influence the input with
    respect to its category.
•   The gradient depends on the loss are little pixels on the wall.
•   Let’s look at the code for different dogs in this syllogism.

     It’s surprising how close these come to making sense!
     Whole sentences are fun, but some of the most entertaining and poetic
bits came out soon after the start of training, when the system was generat-
ing only fragments. Here are some manually selected excerpts after just 10
epochs, again presented exactly as they were produced:

•   Set of of apply, we + the information.
•   Suppose us only parametric.
•   The usually quirk (alpha train had we than that to use them way up).

     These are mostly incoherent, but from these synthetic phrases we can
distill a grain of truth: one of the primary goals of this book has definitely
been to “+ the information.”
     RNNs are great, but transformer-based generators are even better. We
fine-tuned a medium-sized instance of the GPT-2 generator on the current
edition of this book (again, except for this section). Here are a few hand-
picked fragments of output, selected for their creative range (the second set
appear to be figure captions).

•   This is the neural network that’s been hailed as the queen of artificial neurons.
    It’s no surprise that her name is Christine, but it does speak volumes about the
    state of the field.
•   We can chain together several of these versions into a single tensor of a classi-
    fier that is essentially a jack-in-the-box.
•   Let’s use a small utility to take a shortcut that will let us make word predictions
    on the fly, even if we aren’t the right person online or offline.
•   In this view, a 1 in this range is a perfect integer, while a 0 in this range is a
    hyper-realized string of numbers. The approach we adopted in Chapter 6 is to
    treat all 0’s as incomplete, and all 1’s as incomplete, since we still have some
    information about the system we’re evaluating.
•   Figure 10-7: A grid of negative images that don’t have labels.
•   Figure 10-10: A deep learning system learns how to create and remove license
    plates from a dataset.



                                                                   Creative Applications   689
      Summary
                    We started this chapter by looking at deep dreaming, a method for manipu-
                    lating an image to stimulate chosen filters in a network and create wild,
                    psychedelic images. Then we looked at neural style transfer. Using this tech-
                    nique, we slowly change an input of random noise to become simultane-
                    ously more like an input image and like a style reference, such as works by
                    various painters. Finally, we used a little RNN and a transformer to produce
                    new text from the manuscript of this book. It’s fun to make new text that
                    seems familiar or reasonable on first glance!


      Final Thoughts
                    This book has covered only the basic ideas of deep learning. The field is
                    developing at a startling pace. Every year new breakthroughs seem to defy
                    all expectations of what computers can recognize, analyze, predict, and
                    synthesize.
                         Just keeping up with new work can be a full-time job. One way to stay
                    up on new developments is to watch a website called the arXiv (pronounced
                    “archive”) server at https://arxiv.org/, or more specifically, the machine
                    learning section at https://arxiv.org/list/cs.LG/recent. This site hosts preprints
                    of new papers before they appear in journals and conferences. But even
                    watching arXiv can be overwhelming, so many people use the arXiv Sanity
                    Preserver at http://www.arxiv-sanity.com and the Semantic Sanity project at
                    https://s2-sanity.apps.allenai.org/cold-start. Both sites help filter the repository
                    for just those papers involving specific keywords and ideas.
                         In this book we’ve focused on the technical background of deep learn-
                    ing. It’s important to keep in mind that when we use these systems in ways
                    that can affect people, we need to take into account much more than just
                    algorithms (O’Neil 2016). Because of their efficiency, deep learning systems
                    are being widely and rapidly deployed, often with little oversight or consid-
                    eration of their impact on the societies they affect.
                         Deep learning systems are being used today to influence or determine
                    job offers, school admissions, jail sentences, personal and business loans,
                    and even the interpretation of medical tests. Deep learning systems control
                    what people see in their news and social media feeds, choosing items not
                    to build a healthy and well-informed society, but to increase the profits of
                    the organizations delivering those feeds (Orlowski 2020). Deep learning
                    systems in “smart speakers” and “smart displays” (which also contain micro-
                    phones and cameras) listen and watch people in their homes without pause,
                    sometimes sending their captured data up to a remote server for analysis.
                    Cultures used to fear such constant surveillance, but now people pay for
                    these devices and willingly put them in their previously private spaces, such
                    as their homes and bedrooms. Deep learning is being used to single out
                    potentially troublesome children in schools, evaluate the honesty of people
                    answering questions at border crossings, and identify individuals at protests
                    and other gatherings by recognizing their faces. Mistakes made by these


690    Chapter 23
