                          14
               BAC K P R O PAG AT I O N




            As we’ve seen, a neural network is just a col-
            lection of neurons, each doing its own little
           calculation and then passing on its results to
       other neurons. How can we train such a thing
to produce the results we want? And how can we do it
efficiently?
     The answer is backpropagation, or simply backprop. Without backprop, we
wouldn’t have today’s widespread use of deep learning because we wouldn’t
be able to train big networks in reasonable amounts of time. Every mod-
ern deep learning library provides a stable and efficient implementation
of backprop. Even though most people will never implement backprop, it’s
important to understand the algorithm because so much of deep learning
depends on it.
     Most introductions to backprop are presented mathematically, as a col-
lection of equations with associated discussion (Fullér 2010). As usual, we
skip the mathematics here and focus instead on the concepts. The middle of
this chapter, where we discuss the core of backprop, is the most detailed part
of this book. You might want to read it lightly the first time to get the big
                    picture for what’s going on and how the pieces fit together. Then, if you like,
                    you can come back and take it more slowly, following the individual steps.


      A High-Level Overview of Training
                    Networks learn by minimizing their mistakes. The process begins with a
                    number called a cost, loss, or penalty, for each mistake. During training, the
                    network reduces the cost, resulting in outputs closer to what we want.

                    Punishing Error
                    Suppose we have a classifier that identifies each input as one of five classes,
                    numbered 1 to 5. The class that has the largest value is the network’s pre-
                    diction for each input’s class. Our classifier is brand-new and has had no
                    training, so all of the weights have small random values. Figure 14-1 shows
                    the network classifying its first input sample.

                           1       2         3        4         5
                       0.35       0.2      0.15      0.1       0.2     Outputs



                                        Network




                       3                                     Sample

                    Label               Features
                    Figure 14-1: A neural network processing a sample and assigning it
                    to class 1. We want it to be assigned to class 3.

                         In this example, the network has decided that the sample belongs to
                    class 1 because the largest output, 0.35, is from output 1 (we’re assuming we
                    have a softmax layer at the end of the network, so the outputs add up to 1).
                    Unfortunately, the sample was labeled as belonging to class 3. We shouldn’t
                    have expected the right answer. The network can easily have thousands, or
                    even millions, of weights, and they currently all have their initial, random
                    values. Therefore, the outputs are just random values as well. Even if the
                    network had predicted class 3 for this sample, it would have been pure luck.
                         When a prediction doesn’t match that sample’s label, we can come up
                    with a single number to tell us just how wrong this answer is. For example,
                    if class 3 were to get almost the largest score, we say the network would be
                    more correct (or less wrong) relative to assigning class 3 the smallest score.
                    We call this number describing the mismatch between the label and the pre-
                    diction the error score, or error, or sometimes the penalty, or loss (if the word

352    Chapter 14
loss seems like a strange synonym for “error,” it may help to think of it as
describing how much information is “lost” because we have a wrong answer).
      The error (or loss) is a floating-point number that can take on any value,
though often we set things up so that it’s always positive. The larger the error,
the more “wrong” our network’s prediction is for the label of this input. An
error of zero means that the network predicted the sample’s label correctly.
In a perfect world, we’d get the error down to zero for every sample in the
training set. In practice, we usually settle for getting as close as we can.
      Although in this chapter we focus on reducing the error on specific
samples (or groups of samples), our overall goal is to minimize the total
error for the entire training set, which is usually just the sum of the indi-
vidual errors.
      The way we choose to determine the error gives us tremendous flexibil-
ity in guiding the network’s learning process. The thinking can seem a little
backward, however, because the error tells the network what not to do. It’s
like the apocryphal quote about sculpting: to carve an elephant, you simply
start with a block of stone and chip away everything that doesn’t look like
an elephant (Quote Investigator 2020).
      In our case, we start with an initialized network and then use the error
term to chip away all the behavior we don’t want. In other words, we don’t
really teach the network to find the correct answers. Instead, we penalize
incorrect answers by assigning them a positive amount of error. The only
way the network can reduce the overall error is to avoid incorrect answers,
so that’s what it learns to do. This is a powerful idea: to get the behavior we
want, we penalize the behavior we don’t want.
      If we want to penalize several things at once, we compute a value, or
term, for each one and add them up to get the total error. For instance, we
might want our classifier to predict the correct class and assign it a score
that is at least twice as large as the score for the next-closest class. We can
compute numbers representing both desires and use their sum as our error
term. The only way for the network to drive the error down to zero (or as
close to zero as it can get) is to change its weights to achieve both goals.
      A popular error term comes from the observation that learning is often
the most efficient when the weights in the network are all in a small range,
such as [–1, 1]. To enforce this, we can include an error term that has a
large value when the weights get too far from this range. This is called regu-
larization. In order to minimize the error, the network learns to keep the
weights small.
      All of this raises the natural question of how on earth the network is
able to accomplish the goal of minimizing the error. That’s the point of this
chapter.
      To keep things simple, we’ll use an error measure with just one term
that punishes a mismatch between the network’s prediction and the label.
Everything we see in the rest of this chapter works identically when there
are more terms in the error. Our first algorithm for teaching the network
is just a thought experiment since it would be absurdly slow on today’s com-
puters. But the ideas resulting from this experiment form the conceptual
basis for the more efficient techniques we discuss later in this chapter.

                                                               Backpropagation   353
                   A Slow Way to Learn
                   Let’s stick with our running example of a classifier trained with supervised
                   learning. We’ll give the network a sample and compare the system’s predic-
                   tion with the sample’s label. If the network gets it right and predicts the cor-
                   rect label, we won’t change anything and we’ll move on to the next sample
                   (as the proverb goes, “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it” [Seung 2005]). But if the
                   result for a particular sample is incorrect, we’ll try to improve things.
                        Let’s make this improvement in a simple way. We’ll pick one weight at
                   random from the whole network and freeze all the other values so they can’t
                   change. We already know the error associated with the weight’s current
                   value, so we create a small random value centered around zero, which we’ll
                   call m, add that to that weight, and reevaluate the same sample again. This
                   change to one weight causes a ripple effect through the rest of the network,
                   as every neuron that depends on a computation involving that neuron’s
                   output also changes. The result is a new set of predictions, and thus a new
                   error for that sample.
                        If the new error is less than the previous error, then we’ve made things
                   better and we keep this change. If the results didn’t get better, then we need
                   to undo the change. Now we pick another weight at random, modify it by
                   another random amount, reevaluate the network to see if we want to keep
                   that change, pick another weight, modify it, and so on, again and again.
                        We can continue nudging weights until the results improve by a cer-
                   tain amount, we decide we’ve tried enough times, or we decide to stop for
                   any other reason. At this point, we select the next sample and tune lots of
                   weights again. When we’ve used all the samples in our training set, we just
                   go through them all again (maybe in a different order), over and over. The
                   idea is that each little improvement brings us closer to a network that accu-
                   rately predicts the label for every sample.
                        With this technique, we expect the network to slowly improve, though
                   there may be setbacks along the way. For example, later samples may cause
                   changes that ruin the improvements we just made for earlier samples.
                        Given enough time and resources, we expect that the network will even-
                   tually improve to the point where it’s predicting every sample as well as it
                   can. The important word in that last sentence is eventually. As in, “The water
                   will boil, eventually,” or “The Andromeda galaxy will collide with our Milky
                   Way galaxy, eventually” (NASA 2012). Although the concepts are right, this
                   technique is definitely not practical. Modern networks can have millions of
                   weights. Trying to find the best values for all those weights with this algo-
                   rithm is just not realistic.
                        Our goal in the rest of this chapter is to take this rough idea and
                   restructure it into a vastly more practical algorithm.
                        Before we move on, it’s worth noting that because we’re focusing on
                   weights, we’re automatically adjusting the influence of each neuron’s bias,
                   thanks to the bias trick we saw in Chapter 13. That means we don’t have to
                   think about the bias terms, which makes everything simpler.
                        Let’s now consider how we might improve our incredibly slow weight-
                   changing algorithm.


354   Chapter 14
                   Gradient Descent
                   The algorithm of the last section improved our network, but at a glacial
                   pace. One big source of inefficiency was that half of our adjustments to the
                   weights were in the wrong direction: we added a value when we should have
                   subtracted it, and vice versa. That’s why we had to undo our changes when
                   the error went up. Another problem is that we tuned each weight one by
                   one, which required us to evaluate an immense number of samples. Let’s
                   solve these problems.
                        We can double our training speed if we know beforehand whether we
                   want to nudge each weight in a positive or negative direction. We can get
                   exactly that information from the gradient of the error with respect to that
                   weight. Recall that we met the gradient in Chapter 5, where it told us how
                   the height of a surface changes as each of its parameters changes. Let’s nar-
                   row that down for the present case.
                        As before, we’re going to freeze the whole network except for one
                   weight. If we plot the value of that weight on a horizontal axis, we can plot
                   the network’s error for that weight vertically. The errors, taken together,
                   form a curve called the error curve. In this situation, we can find the gradi-
                   ent (or derivative) of the error at any particular value of the weight by find-
                   ing the slope of the error curve above that weight.
                        If the gradient directly above the weight is positive (that is, the line goes
                   up as we move to the right), then increasing the value of the weight (moving
                   it to the right) causes the error to go up. Similarly, and more usefully for us,
                   decreasing the value of the weight (moving it to the left) causes the error to
                   go down. If the slope of the error is negative, the situations are reversed.
                        Figure 14-2 shows two examples.

                     Error                                                       Error




                        0                                                           0
                       (a)                                                        (b)
Figure 14-2: The gradient tells us what happens to the error (the black curves) if we make a weight smaller
or larger, for two different error curves. Each figure shows the gradient at two weights.

                        The error curve for every weight in the network is different because
                   every weight has a different effect on the final error. But if we can find the
                   gradient for a specific weight, we’ve solved the problem of guessing whether
                   it needs to increase or decrease in order to reduce the error. If we can find
                   the gradients for all the weights, we can adjust them all at once, rather than
                   one by one. If we can adjust every weight simultaneously, using its own

                                                                                          Backpropagation     355
                    specific gradient to tell us whether to make it bigger or smaller, we have an
                    efficient way to improve our network.
                         This is just what we do. Because we use the gradient to move each weight
                    to produce a lower value on the error curve, we call the algorithm gradient
                    descent.
                         Before we dig into gradient descent, notice that this algorithm makes
                    the assumption that tweaking all the weights independently and simultane-
                    ously after we evaluate an incorrect sample leads to a reduction in the error,
                    not just for that sample, but for the entire training set, and by extension,
                    all data that we see after the network is released. This is a bold assumption
                    because we’ve already noted how changing one weight can cause ripple
                    effects through the rest of the network. Changing the output of one neuron
                    changes the inputs, and thus the outputs, of all neurons that use that value,
                    which in turn changes their gradients. If we’re unlucky, some weights that
                    had a positive gradient might now have a negative gradient, or vice versa.
                    That means if we stick with the gradients we computed, changing those
                    weights makes the error bigger, not smaller. To control this problem, we
                    usually make small changes to every weight in the hopes that any such mis-
                    takes won’t drown out our improvements.


      Getting Started
                    Let’s reduce the overall error by adjusting the network’s weights in two
                    steps. In the first step, called backpropagation or backprop, we visit each neu-
                    ron where we calculate and store a number that is related to the network’s
                    error. Once we have this value for every neuron, we use it to update every
                    weight coming into that neuron. This second step is called the update step,
                    or the optimization step. It’s not typically considered part of backpropaga-
                    tion, but sometimes people casually roll the two steps together and call the
                    whole thing backpropagation. This chapter focuses on just the first step.
                    Chapter 15 focuses on optimization.
                        In this discussion, we’re going to ignore activation functions. Their
                    nonlinear nature is essential to making neural networks work, but that
                    same nature introduces a lot of detail that isn’t relevant to understand-
                    ing the essence of backprop. Despite this simplification for the point of a
                    clearer discussion, activation functions are definitely accounted for in any
                    implementation of backprop.
                        With this simplification in place, we can make an important observa-
                    tion: When any neuron output in our network changes, the final output
                    error changes by a proportional amount.
                        Let’s unpack that. We only care about two types of values in a neural
                    network: weights (which we can set and change as we please), and neuron
                    outputs (which are computed automatically and are beyond our direct
                    control). Except for the very first layer, a neuron’s input values are each
                    the output of a previous neuron times the weight of the edge that output
                    travels on. Each neuron’s output is just the sum of all of these weighted
                    inputs. Without an activation function, every change in a neuron’s output


356    Chapter 14
is proportional to the changes in its inputs, or the weights on those inputs.
If the inputs themselves are constant, the only way for a neuron’s output
to change (and thus affect the final error) is if the weights on its inputs
change.
      Imagine we’re looking at a neuron whose output has just changed.
What happens to the network’s error as a result? Without activation func-
tions, the only operations in our network are multiplication and addition. If
we write down the math (which we won’t do), it turns out that the change in
the final error is always proportional to the change in the neuron’s output.
      The connection between any change in the neuron’s output and the
resulting change in the final error is just the neuron’s change multiplied by
some number. This number goes by various names, but the most popular
is the lowercase Greek letter δ (delta), though sometimes the uppercase
version, Δ, is used. Mathematicians often use the delta character to mean
“change” of some sort, so this was a natural (if terse) choice of name.
      Every neuron has a delta, or δ, associated with it as a result of evaluat-
ing the current network with the current sample. This is a real number
that can be big or small, positive or negative. Assuming the network’s input
doesn’t change and the rest of the network is frozen, if a neuron’s output
changes by a particular amount, we can multiply that change by the neu-
ron’s delta to see how the entire network’s output will change.
      To illustrate the idea, let’s focus just on one neuron’s output for a
moment. Let’s add some arbitrary number to its output just before that
value emerges. Figure 14-3 shows the idea graphically, where we use the
­letter m (for “modification”) for this extra value.

  A      AD

         BD                                                          Output
 B                                                                   of D
         CD

 C                                                                   Change in error
                                    m
                                                                     due to m



                                                 δ
                                    D

Figure 14-3: Computing the change in the network’s final error due to a change in
a neuron’s output

    Because the output will change by m, we know the change in the final
error is m times the neuron’s δ.
    In Figure 14-3, we changed the output directly by placing the value m
inside the neuron. Alternatively, we can cause a change in the output by

                                                                     Backpropagation   357
                    changing one of the inputs. Let’s change the value that’s coming in from
                    any other neuron. The same logic holds as for Figure 14-3 and is shown in
                    Figure 14-4. We can instead add m to the value coming in from neurons A
                    or C if we prefer; all that matters is that the output of D changes by m. Since
                    we’re still just changing the output by m, we find the change in the final
                    error by multiplying it by the same value of δ as in Figure 14-3.

                                            A        AD

                          BD                                                              Output
                     B
                                                                                          of D
                                                     CD
                                            C
                                                                   D




                                   m                                                      Change in error
                                                                                          due to m



                                                 δ
                    Figure 14-4: A variation of Figure 14-3, where we add m to the output of B (after it has
                    been multiplied by the weight BD)

                         Figure 14-3 and Figure 14-4 illustrate that the change in the network’s
                    final output can be predicted from either a change to any neuron’s output
                    or any weight in the network.
                         We can use the delta associated with each neuron to tell us whether
                    each of its incoming weights should be nudged in the positive or negative
                    direction.
                         Let’s walk through an example.
                         This is where things start to get detailed. The basic idea is that the
                    error will give us a gradient for every weight, and then we can use this gra-
                    dient to adjust each weight by a little bit so that the overall error decreases.
                    The mechanics for this aren’t super complicated, but there are some new
                    ideas, some new names, and a bunch of details to keep straight. If it feels
                    like too much to take in, you might want to skim this part of the chapter
                    on first reading (up to, say, the section “Backprop on a Larger Network”),
                    and return here later for a more complete understanding of the process.


      Backprop on a Tiny Neural Network
                    To get a handle on backprop, we’ll use a tiny network that classifies 2D
                    points into two categories, which we’ll call class 1 and class 2. If the points

358    Chapter 14
can be separated by a straight line, then we can do this job with just one
neuron, but let’s use a little network because it lets us see the general princi-
ples. Let’s begin by looking at the network and giving a label to everything
we care about. This will make later discussions simpler and easier to follow.
Figure 14-5 shows our little network, along with a name for each of its eight
weights. For simplicity, we’ll leave out the usual softmax step after neurons
C and D.


X                A                   C               P1



Y                B                   D               P2

Figure 14-5: A simple neural network with four neurons

     Finally, we want to refer to the output and delta for every neuron. For
this, let’s make little two-letter names by combining the neuron’s name with
the value we want to refer to. So Ao and Bo are the names of the outputs of
neurons A and B, and Aδ and Bδ are the delta values for those two neurons.
     Figure 14-6 shows these values stored with their neurons.


X                  Ao, Aδ                      Co, Cδ                   P1



Y                  Bo, Bδ                      Do, Dδ                   P2

Figure 14-6: Our simple network with the output and delta values for each neuron

     We can watch what happens when neuron outputs change, causing
changes to the error. Let’s label the change in the output of neuron A due
to a change by an amount m as Am, the network’s final error as E, and the
resulting change to the error as Em.
     Now we can be more precise about what happens to the error when a
neuron’s output changes. If we have a change Am in the output of neuron
A, then multiplying that change by Aδ gives us the change in the error.
That is, the change Em is given by Am × Aδ. We think of the action of Aδ as
multiplying, or scaling, the change in the output of neuron A, giving us the
corresponding change in the error. Figure 14-7 shows the schematic setup
we use in this chapter for visualizing the way changes in a neuron’s output
are scaled by its delta to produce changes to the error.




                                                                     Backpropagation   359
                                                                    Em = change
                                                                    in error
                          Am = change
                              in output
                                                    Aδ                                         New error =
                                                                                               E + Em

New output =
   Ao + Am
                              Ao =
                           starting
                            output                                      E = starting
                                                                        error



                       Neuron A                                             Network
                        output                                               error

Figure 14-7: Our schematic for visualizing how changes in a neuron’s output can change the network’s error

                        At the left of Figure 14-7 we start with neuron A. We see the starting
                    output of A, or Ao, a change in output Am, and its new output Ao + Am. The
                    arrow inside the box for Am shows that this change is positive. This change
                    is multiplied by Aδ to give us Em, the change in the error. We show this
                    operation as a wedge, illustrating the amplification of Am. Adding Em to the
                    previous value of the error, E, gives us the new error E + Em. In this case,
                    both Am and Aδ are positive, so the change in the error Am × Aδ is also
                    positive, increasing the error. When either (but not both) of Am or Aδ is
                    negative, the error decreases.
                        Now that we’ve labeled everything, we’re finally ready to look at the
                    backpropagation algorithm.

                    Finding Deltas for the Output Neurons
                    Backpropagation is all about finding the delta value for each neuron. To
                    do that, we find gradients of the error at the end of the network and then
                    propagate, or move, those gradients backward to the start. So, we begin at
                    the end: the output layer.

                    Calculating the Network Error
                    The outputs of neuron C and D in our tiny network give us the probabilities
                    that the input is in class 1 or class 2, respectively. In a perfect world, a sam-
                    ple that belongs to class 1 would produce a value of 1.0 for P1 and 0.0 for
                    P2, meaning that the system is certain that it belongs to class 1 and simulta-
                    neously certain that it does not belong to class 2. If the system’s a little less
                    certain, we might get P1 = 0.8 and P2 = 0.2, telling us that it’s much more
                    likely that the sample is in class 1.


360    Chapter 14
     We want to come up with a single number to represent the network’s
error. To do that, we compare the values of P1 and P2 with the label for this
sample. The easiest way to make that comparison is if the label is one-hot
encoded, as we saw in Chapter 10. Recall that one-hot encoding makes a
list of zeros as long as the number of classes, except for a 1 in the entry cor-
responding to the correct class. In our case, we have only two classes, so
our labels are (1, 0) for a sample in class 1, and (0, 1) for a sample in class 2.
Sometimes this form of label is also called a target.
     Let’s put the predictions P1 and P2 into a list as well: (P1, P2). Now we
can just compare the lists. We almost always use cross entropy for this, as
discussed in Chapter 6. Figure 14-8 shows the idea.

                                   Prediction                    Label


X            A             C           P1                          L1
                                                   Error
                                                 formula
Y            B             D           P2                          L2


                                                  Error

Figure 14-8: Finding the error from a sample

    Every deep learning library provides a built-in cross entropy function to
help us find the error in a classifier such as this one. In addition to comput-
ing the network’s error, the function also provides a gradient to tell us how
the error will change if we increase any one of its four inputs.
    Using the error gradient, we can look at the value coming out of every
neuron in the output layer, and determine if we’d like that value to become
more positive or more negative. We will later nudge each neuron in the
direction that causes the error to decrease.

Drawing Our Error
Let’s look at an error curve. We’ll also draw the gradient with respect to one
particular output or weight in the network. Remember that this is just the
slope of the error at that point.
    Let’s look at how the error varies with changes in the prediction P1,
shown in Figure 14-9. Suppose P1 has the value –1.
    In Figure 14-9 we’ve marked the value P1 = −1 with an orange dot, and
we’ve drawn the derivative at the location on the curve directly above this
value of P1 with a green line. That derivative (or gradient) tells us that if we
make P1 more positive (that is, we move right from −1), the error in the net-
work will decrease.




                                                                Backpropagation   361
                   Figure 14-9: How the error depends on different values of P1

                        If we knew the black curve representing the error, we wouldn’t need
                   the gradient, since we’d just find the curve’s minimum. Unfortunately, the
                   math doesn’t give us the black curve (we’re drawing it here just for refer-
                   ence). But the day is saved because the math gives us enough information
                   to find the curve’s derivative at any location.
                        The derivative in Figure 14-9 tells us what happens to the error if we
                   increase or decrease P1 by a little bit. After we’ve changed P1, we can find the
                   derivative at its new location and repeat. The derivative, or gradient, accu-
                   rately predicts the new error after each change to P1 as long as we keep that
                   change small. The bigger the change, the less accurate the prediction is.
                        We can see this characteristic in Figure 14-9. Suppose we move P1 by
                   one unit to the right from −1. According to the derivative, we now expect
                   an error of 0. But at P1 = 0, the error (the value of the black curve) is really
                   about 1. We moved P1 too far. In the interests of clear figures that are easy
                   to read, we’ll sometimes make large moves, but in practice, we change our
                   weights by small amounts.
                        Let’s use the derivative to predict the numerical change in the error
                   due to a change in P1. What’s the slope of the green line in Figure 14-9?
                   The left end is at about (−2, 8), and the right end is at about (0, 0). Thus,
                   the line descends about four units for every one unit we move to the right,
                   for a slope of −4/1 or −4. If P1 changed by 0.5 (that is, it changed from −1 to
                   −0.5), we’d predict that the error would go down by 0.5 × −4 = −2.
                        Remember that our goal is to find Cδ. We’ve just done it! P1 in this dis-
                   cussion is just another name for Co, the output of neuron C. We’ve found
                   that when P1 = –1, a change of 1 in Co (or P1) would result in a change of



362   Chapter 14
−4 in the error. As we discussed, we shouldn’t have too much confidence in
this prediction after such a big change in P1. But for small moves, the pro-
portion is right. For instance, if we increase P1 by 0.01, then we expect the
error to change by −4 × 0.01 = −0.04, and for such a small change in P1, the
predicted change in the error should be pretty accurate. If we increase P1
by 0.02, then we expect the error to change by −4 × 0.02 = −0.08.
     The same thinking holds if we decrease the value of P1, or move it to
the left. If P1 changes from −1 to, say, −1.1, we expect the error to change by
−0.1 × −4 = 0.4, so the error would increase by 0.4.
     We’ve found that for any amount of change in Co, we can predict the
change in the error by multiplying Co by −4. That’s exactly what we’ve been
looking for! The value of Cδ is −4. Note that as soon as the value of P1
changes, for any reason, the error curve changes and the value of Cδ has to
be computed all over again.
     We’ve just found our first delta value, which tells us how much the error
will change if there’s a change to the output of C. It’s just the derivative of
the error function measured at P1 (or Co). Figure 14-10 shows all of this
visually using our error diagram.

4
                                                  Em
3
                                     Cδ
2
                                                                         New
                                                                         error
                        Cm
1
                         New
                         output
0

          Neuron C                                         Network
           output                                           error

Figure 14-10: Our error diagram illustrating the change in the error from a
change in the output of neuron C due to a small increase, Cm

     The original output is the green bar at the far left of Figure 14-10. We
imagine that due to a change in one of the input weights, the output of C
increases by an amount Cm. This is amplified by multiplying it by Cδ, which
gives us the change in the error, Em. That is, Em = Cm × Cδ. Here the value
of Cm is about 1/4 (the upward arrow in the box for Cm tells us that the
change is positive), and the value of Cδ is −4 (the arrow in that box tells us
the value is negative). So Em = −4 × 1/4 = −1. The new error, at the far right,
is the previous error plus Em, or 4 + (−1) = 3.
     Remember that at this point, we’re not yet doing anything with this
delta value. Our goal right now is just to find the deltas for our neurons.
We’ll use them later to change the weights.


                                                                       Backpropagation   363
                   Finding Dδ
                   Let’s repeat this whole process for P2, to get the value of Dδ, or the delta for
                   neuron D.
                        Let’s start with a recap of Cδ. On the left of Figure 14-11 we show the
                   error curve for P1. As a result of also moving all of the other weights to bet-
                   ter values, the error curve for P1 now has a minimum of around 2.




                   Figure 14-11: Left: The error for different values of P1. Right: The error for different values of P2.

                         If we use the new value and error curve for P1, it looks like a change
                   of about 0.5 in P1 will result in a change of about −1.5 in the error, so Cδ is
                   about −1.5 / 0.5 = −3. Instead of changing P1, what if we change P2?
                         Take a look at the graph on the right of Figure 14-11. A change of about
                   −0.5 (moving left this time, toward the minimum of the bowl) results in
                   a change of about −1.25 in the error, so Dδ is about 1.25 / −0.5 = 2.5. The
                   positive result here tells us that moving P2 to the right causes the error to
                   go up, so we want to move P2 to the left.
                         There are some interesting things to observe here. First, although both
                   curves are bowl shaped, the bottoms of the bowls are at different weight val-
                   ues. Second, because the current values of P1 and P2 are on opposite sides
                   of the bottom of their respective bowls, their derivatives have opposite signs
                   (one is positive, the other is negative).
                         The most important observation is that we cannot currently get the
                   error down to 0. In this example, the curves never get lower than about 2.
                   That’s because each curve looks at changing just one value, while the other
                   is fixed. So even if P1 got to a value of 1, where its curve is a minimum,
                   there would still be error in the result because P2 is not at its ideal value of
                   0, and vice versa. This means that if we change just one of these two values,
                   we can’t get down to the minimum error of 0. Getting an error of 0 is ideal,
                   but, more generally, our goal is to move each weight, a little bit at a time,
                   until we’ve pushed the error to as small a value as possible. For some net-
                   works, we may never be able to get to 0.
                         Note that we may not want to get the error to 0, even if we could. As we
                   saw in Chapter 9, when a network is overfitting, its training error continues
                   to decrease, but its ability to handle new data gets worse. We really want
                   to minimize the error as much as possible without overfitting. In casual

364   Chapter 14
discussions, we usually say that we want to get down to zero error, with the
understanding that it’s better to stop with some error than to keep training
and overfit.
    We’ll see later that we can improve all the weights in the network at the
same time, as long as we take very small steps. Then we have to evaluate the
errors again to find new curves and then new derivatives and deltas before
we can make another adjustment. Rather than take many steps after each
sample, we usually adjust the weights only once, and then evaluate another
sample, adjust the weights once again, and so on.

Measuring Error
We mentioned earlier that we often compute the error in a classifier using
cross entropy. For this discussion, let’s use a simpler formula that makes it
easy to find the delta for each output neuron. This error measure is called
the quadratic cost function, or the mean squared error (MSE) (Nielsen 2015).
As usual, we won’t get into the mathematics of this equation. We chose
it because it lets us find the delta for an output neuron as the difference
between the neuron’s value and the corresponding label entry (Seung
2005). Figure 14-12 shows the idea graphically.


              Label       L1      L2



           Co
  C                   L1 – Co

           Cδ

                Do
  D                            L2 – Do

                Dδ
Figure 14-12: When we use the quadratic cost function, the delta
for any output neuron is just the value in the label minus the output of
that neuron. As shown in red, we save that delta value with its neuron.

     Remember that Co and P1 are two names for the same value, as are Do
and P2.
     Let’s consider Co (or P1) when the first label is 1. If Co = 1, then the
value of Cδ = 1 – Co = 0, so any change in Co gets multiplied by 0, resulting
in no change to the output error.
     Now suppose that Co = 2. Then the difference is Cδ = 1 – Co = −1, tell-
ing us that a change to Co changes the error by the same amount, but with
the opposite sign. If Co is much larger, say Co = 5, then 1 – Co = −4, which
tells us that any change to Co is amplified by a factor of −4 in the change to

                                                                           Backpropagation   365
                   the error. We’ve been using large numbers for convenience, but remember
                   that the derivative only accurately predicts what happens if we take a very
                   small step.
                        The same thought process holds for neuron D, and its output Do (or P2).
                        We’ve now completed the first step in backpropagation: we found
                   the delta values for all the neurons in the output layer. We know from
                   Figure 14-12 that the delta for an output neuron depends on the value
                   in the label and the neuron’s output. When we change the values of the
                   weights going into that neuron, its delta changes as well. The delta is a tem-
                   porary value that changes with every change to the network or its inputs.
                   This is another reason we adjust the weights only once per sample. Since we
                   have to recompute all the deltas after each update, we might as well evaluate
                   a new sample first, and make use of the extra information it provides us.
                        Remember that our big goal is to find changes for the weights. When
                   we know the deltas for all the neurons in a layer, we can update all the
                   weights feeding into that layer. Let’s see how that’s done.

                   Using Deltas to Change Weights
                   We’ve seen how to find a delta value for every neuron in the output layer.
                   We know that a change to the neuron’s output must come from a change in
                   an input, which in turn can come from either a change in a previous neu-
                   ron’s output or the weight connecting that output to this neuron. Let’s look
                   at these cases.
                        For convenience, let’s say that a neuron’s output or a weight is changed
                   by a value of 1. Figure 14-13 shows that every change of 1 in the weight AC,
                   which multiplies the output of neuron A before it’s received by neuron C,
                   leads to a corresponding change of Ao × Cδ in the network error in our net-
                   work. Subtracting that value leads to a change of –Ao × Cδ in the error. So,
                   if we want to reduce the network’s error by subtracting Ao × Cδ from it, we
                   can change the value of weight AC by –1 to accomplish this.

                                   Change in
                                  network error


                              Ao × Cδ

                      –1                                              Change
                                                             1        in AC
                                                              0
                                             –Ao × Cδ

                   Figure 14-13: When AC changes by 1, the network error changes by Ao × Cδ.


366   Chapter 14
     We can summarize this process visually with an additional convention
for our diagrams. We’ve been drawing the outputs of neurons as arrows
coming out of a circle to the right. Let’s draw deltas using arrows coming
out of the circles to the left, as in Figure 14-14.


Cδ               C               Co
Figure 14-14: Neuron C has an output Co, drawn with an arrow
pointing right, and a delta Cδ, drawn with an arrow pointing left.

    With this convention, the whole process for finding the updated value
for weight AC, or AC – (Ao × Cδ), is summarized in Figure 14-15. Showing
subtraction in a diagram like this is hard, because if we have a “minus” node
with two incoming arrows, it’s not clear which value is being subtracted from
the other (that is, if the inputs are x and y, are we computing x − y or y − x?).
To sidestep that problem, we compute AC − (Ao × Cδ) by finding Ao × Cδ,
multiplying that by −1, and then adding that result to AC.

                                     -1




          Ao                                                 Cδ
  A                                 AC                                C

Figure 14-15: Updating the value of weight AC to the new value AC – (Ao × Cδ)

    Let’s walk through this figure. We start with the output Ao from neuron
A and the delta Cδ from output neuron C, and multiply them together (at
the top of the figure). We want to subtract this from the current value of
AC. To show this clearly in the diagram, we multiply the product by −1 and
then add it to the weight AC. The green arrow is the update step, where this
result becomes the new value of AC.
    Figure 14-15 is big news! We’ve found out how to change the weights
coming into the output neurons in order to reduce the network’s error. We
can apply this to all four weights going into the output neurons (that is,
AC, BC, AD, and BD). We’ve just trained our neural network a little bit by
improving four of its weights.



                                                                     Backpropagation   367
                        Sticking with the output layer, if we change the weights for both output
                   neurons C and D to reduce the error by 1 from each neuron, we’d expect the
                   error to go down by −2. We can predict this because the neurons sharing the
                   same layer don’t rely on each other’s outputs. Since C and D are both in the
                   output layer, C doesn’t depend on Do and D doesn’t depend on Co. They do
                   depend on the outputs of neurons on previous layers, but right now we’re just
                   focusing on the effect of changing weights for C and D.
                        It’s wonderful that we know how to adjust the weights on edges going
                   into the output layer, but how about all the other weights? Our next goal is
                   to figure out the deltas for all the neurons in all the preceding layers. Once
                   we have a delta for every neuron in the network, we can use Figure 14-15 to
                   adjust every weight in the network to reduce the error.
                        And this brings us to the remarkable trick of backpropagation: we can
                   use the neuron deltas at one layer to find the neuron deltas for its preced-
                   ing layer. Let’s see how.

                   Other Neuron Deltas
                   Now that we have the delta values for the output neurons, we can use them
                   to compute the deltas for neurons on the layer just before the output layer.
                   In our simple model, that layer is the hidden layer containing neurons A
                   and B. Let’s focus for the moment just on neuron A and its connection to
                   neuron C.
                        What happens if Ao, the output of A, changes for some reason? Let’s say
                   it goes up by Am. Figure 14-16 follows the chain of actions using arbitrary
                   values for AC and Cδ.

                   4
                                                                                Em
                   3
                            Am
                                                                   Cδ
                   2
                                      AC                                  Previous                     New
                                                                             error                     error
                   1                                  Cm


                   0
                         Neuron A                   Neuron C
                          output                     output                                  Network
                                                                                              error

                   Figure 14-16: Following the results if we change the output of neuron A

                       If we read the diagram in Figure 14-16 from left to right, the change
                   to A, shown as Am, is multiplied by the weight AC and then added to the
                   values accumulated by neuron C. This raises the output of C by Cm. As we
                   know, this change in C can be multiplied by Cδ to find the change in the
                   network error.

368   Chapter 14
     So now we have a chain of operations from neuron A to neuron C and
then to the error. The first step of the chain says that if we multiply the
change in Ao (that is, Am) by the weight AC, giving us Am × AC, we get Cm,
the change in the output of C. And we know from earlier that if we multiply
this value of Cm by Cδ, forming Cm × Cδ, we get the change in the error.
     So, mushing this all together, we find that the change in the error due
to a change Am in the output of A is Am × AC × Cδ. We just found the delta
for A! It’s just Aδ = AC × Cδ.
     Figure 14-17 shows this visually.

4
                                             Em
3                    AC Cδ
          Am
2
                                        Previous                      New
                                           error                      error
1


0
       Neuron A
        output                                          Network
                                                         error

Figure 14-17: We can mush together the operations in Figure 14-16 into a
more succinct diagram.

     This is kind of amazing. Neuron C has disappeared. It’s literally out of
the picture in Figure 14-17. All we needed was its delta, Cδ, and from that
we could find Aδ, the delta for A. And now that we know Aδ, we can update
all of the weights that feed into neuron A, and then . . . no, wait a second.
     We don’t really have Aδ yet. We just have one piece of it.
     At the start of this discussion we said we’d focus on neurons A and
C, and that was fine. But if we now remember the rest of the network in
Figure 14-8, we can see that neuron D also uses the output of A. If Ao
changes due to Am, then the output of D changes as well, and that also
affects the error.
     To find the change in the error due to neuron D caused by a change in
the output of neuron A, we can repeat the analysis we just went through by
just replacing neuron C with neuron D. If Ao changes by Am, and nothing else
changes, the change in the error due to the change in D is given by AD × Dδ.
     Figure 14-18 shows these two outputs from A at the same time. This fig-
ure is set up slightly differently from previous figures of this type that we’ve
seen earlier. Here, the effect of a change in A on the error due to a change
in C is shown by the path from the center of the diagram moving to the
right. The effect of a change in A on the error due to a change in D is
shown by the path from the center of the diagram and moving left.

                                                                     Backpropagation   369
                   6

                                       Em
                   5                  (AD)




                                                     AD Dδ
                   4
                                                                                                Em

                                                                           AC Cδ
                                                                                               (AC)
                   3
                                                                 Am
                   2
                       New                   Previous                               Previous                New
                       error                 error                                     error                error
                   1


                   0
                                                                Neuron A
                                  Network                        output                           Network
                                   error                                                           error


                                  Change from A followed by D              Change from A followed by C

                   Figure 14-18: The output of neuron A is used by both neuron C and neuron D.

                       Figure 14-18 shows two separate changes to the error. Since neurons C
                   and D don’t influence each other, their effects on the error are indepen-
                   dent. To find the total change to the error, we just add up the two changes.
                   Figure 14-19 shows the result of adding the change in error via neuron C
                   and the change via neuron D.
                   6
                                       Em
                                      (AC)   Change from AC
                   5
                                       Em
                                      (AD)   Change from AD
                   4


                   3


                   2


                   1


                   0
                       Starting              New
                        error                error

                   Figure 14-19: When the output of neuron A is used by both neuron C and
                   neuron D, the resulting changes to the error add together.

                        Now that we’ve handled all the paths from A to the outputs, we can finally
                   write the value for Aδ. Since the errors add together, as in Fig­ure 14-19, we can
                   just add up the factors that scale Am. If we write it out, this is Aδ = (AC × Cδ) +
                   (AD × Dδ).


370   Chapter 14
     Now that we’ve found the value of delta for neuron A, we can repeat the
process for neuron B to find its delta.
     What we’ve just done is actually far better than finding the delta for
just neurons A and B. We’ve found out how to get the value of delta for
every neuron in any network, no matter how many layers it has or how many
neurons there are! That’s because everything we’ve done involves nothing
more than a neuron, the deltas of all the neurons in the next layer that use
its value as an input, and the weights that join them. With nothing more
than these values, we can find the effect of a neuron’s change on the net-
work’s error, even if the output layer is dozens of layers away.
     To summarize this visually, let’s expand on our convention for drawing
outputs and deltas as right-pointing and left-pointing arrows to include the
weights, as in Figure 14-20. Let’s say that the weight on a connection multi-
plies either the output moving to the right, or the delta moving to the left,
depending on which step we’re thinking about.


                                          AC                                 AC
Aδ         A          Ao           A                  C            A                     C

                                         Ao AC                         Cδ AC
          (a)                               (b)                              (c)
Figure 14-20: Drawing the values associated with neuron A. (a) The output Ao is an arrow
coming out of the right of the neuron, and the delta Aδ as an arrow coming out of the left.
(b) Ao is multiplied by AC on its way to being used by C. (c) Cδ is multiplied by AC on its
way to being used by A.

     Here’s a way to think about Figure 14-20. There is one connection with
one weight joining neurons A and C. If the arrow points to the right, then
the weight multiplies Ao, the output of A, as it heads into neuron C. If the
arrow points to the left, the weight multiplies Cδ, the delta of C, as it heads
into neuron A.
     When we evaluate a sample, we use the feed-forward, left-to-right style
of flow, where the output value from neuron A to neuron C travels over a
connection with weight AC. The result is that the value Ao × AC arrives at
neuron C where it’s added to other incoming values, as in Figure 14-20(b).
     When we later want to compute Aδ, we follow the flow from right to left.
Then the delta leaving neuron C travels over a connection with weight AC.
The result is that the value Cδ × AC arrives at neuron A where it’s added to
other incoming values, as in Figure 14-20(c).
     Now we can summarize both the processing of a sample input and the
computation of the deltas for some arbitrary neuron named H (remember,
we’re ignoring the activation function), as in Figure 14-21.




                                                                       Backpropagation   371
                                Calculating Ho                                 Calculating Hδ

                       Ao        AH                                                         HJ         Jδ

                               BH                                                                HK
                       Bo                               Ho             Hδ                              Kδ
                                            H                                       H
                                 CH                                                         HL
                       Co                                                                              Lδ

                    Figure 14-21: Left: To calculate Ho, we scale the output of each preceding neuron by the
                    weight of its connection and add the results together. Right: To calculate Hδ, we scale the
                    delta of each following neuron by the connection’s weight and add the results together.
                    As usual, we’re ignoring activation functions.

                         This is pleasingly symmetrical. It also reveals an important practical
                    result: calculating deltas is often as efficient as calculating output values.
                    Even when the number of incoming connections is different from the num-
                    ber of outgoing connections, the amount of work involved is still close in
                    both directions.
                         Note that Figure 14-21 doesn’t require anything of neuron H except
                    that it has inputs from a neighbor layer that travel on connections with
                    weights and deltas. We can apply the left half of Figure 14-21 and calculate
                    the output of neuron H as soon as the outputs from the previous layer are
                    available. We can apply the right half of Figure 14-21 and calculate the delta
                    of neuron H as soon as the deltas from the following layer are available.
                         The dependence of Hδ on the deltas of the following neurons shows
                    why we had to treat the output layer neurons as special cases: there are no
                    “next layer” deltas to be used.
                         Throughout this discussion we’ve left out activation functions. It turns
                    out that we can fit them into Figure 14-21 without changing the basic
                    approach. Though the process is conceptually straightforward, the mechan-
                    ics involve a lot of details, so we won’t go into them here.
                         This process of finding the delta for every neuron in the network is the
                    heart of the backpropagation algorithm. Let’s get a feeling for how back-
                    prop works in a larger network.


      Backprop on a Larger Network
                    In the last section we saw the backpropagation algorithm, which lets us
                    compute the delta for every neuron in a network. Because that calculation
                    depended on the deltas in the following neurons and the output neurons
                    don’t have any of those, and because the changes to the output neurons are
                    driven directly by the loss function, we treat the output neurons as a special
                    case. Once all the neuron deltas for any layer (including the output layer)
                    have been found, we can then step backward one layer (toward the inputs),
                    and find the deltas for all the neurons on that layer. Then we step backward


372    Chapter 14
again, compute all the deltas, step back again, and so on, until we reach the
input layer. Once we have the delta for every neuron, we can adjust the val-
ues of the weights going into that neuron, thereby training our network.
     Let’s walk through the process of using backprop to find the deltas for
all the neurons in a slightly larger network.
     In Figure 14-22 we show a network with four layers. There are still two
inputs and outputs, but now we have three hidden layers of two, four, and
three neurons.




X                                                                                P1



Y                                                                                P2




Figure 14-22: A new classifier network with two inputs, two outputs, and three hidden layers

     We start things off by evaluating a sample. We provide the values of its
X and Y features to the inputs, and eventually the network produces the
output predictions P1 and P2.
     Now we can start backpropagation by finding the error in the first of
the output neurons, as shown in the upper part of Figure 14-23.
     We’ve begun arbitrarily with the upper neuron, which gives us the
prediction we’ve labeled P1 (the probability that the sample is in class 1).
From the values of P1 and P2 and the label, we can compute the error in
the network’s output. Let’s suppose the network didn’t predict this sample
perfectly, so the error is greater than zero.
     Using the error, the label, and the values of P1 and P2, we can compute
the value of delta for this neuron. If we’re using the quadratic cost function,
this delta is just the value of the label minus the value of the neuron, as
we saw in Figure 14-12. But if we’re using some other function, it might be
more complicated, so we’ll discuss the general case.
     We save this delta with its neuron, and then repeat this process for all
the other neurons in the output layer (here we have only one more), as
shown in the lower part of Figure 14-23. That finishes up the output layer,
since we now have a delta for every neuron in the output layer.
     At this point, we could start adjusting the weights coming into the out-
put layer, but we usually first find all the neuron deltas first, and then adjust
all the weights. Let’s follow that typical sequence here.

                                                                        Backpropagation   373
                                                                              Label


X                                                       δ          P1
                                                                                               Sensitivity
                                                                                  Error        of error to
                                                                                                   P1
Y                                                                  P2




                                                                                  Label


X                                                                  P1
                                                                                               Sensitivity
                                                                                  Error        of error to
                                                                                                   P2
Y                                                       δ          P2




Figure 14-23: Summarizing the steps for finding the delta for both output neurons

                        We move backward one step to the third hidden layer (the one with
                    three neurons). Let’s consider finding the value of delta for the topmost of
                    these three, as in the left image of Figure 14-24.


                    δ
X                               P1      X                               P1    X                              P1

                                                            δ
Y                               P2      Y                               P2    Y                              P2

                                                                                               δ


Figure 14-24: Using backpropagation to find the deltas for the next-to-last layer of neurons


374    Chapter 14
                        To find the delta for this neuron, we follow the recipe of Figure 14-18 to
                   get the individual contributions, and then the recipe of Figure 14-19 to add
                   them together to get the delta for this neuron.
                        Now we just work our way through the layer, applying the same process to
                   each neuron. When we’ve completed all the neurons in this three-neuron layer,
                   we take a step backward and start on the preceding hidden layer with four neu-
                   rons. This is where things really become beautiful. To find the deltas for each
                   neuron in this layer, we need only the weights to each neuron that uses that
                   neuron’s output and the deltas for those neurons, which we just computed.
                        The other layers are irrelevant. We don’t care about the output layer
                   anymore now.
                        Figure 14-25 shows how we compute the deltas for the four neurons in
                   the second hidden layer.


                 δ

X                                             P1           X                 δ                        P1



Y                                             P2           Y                                          P2




X                                              P1          X                                          P1



Y                δ                             P2          Y                                          P2



                                                                             δ

Figure 14-25: Using backprop to find the delta values for the second hidden layer

                        When all four neurons have had deltas assigned to them, that layer is
                   finished, and we take another step backward. Now we’re at the first hidden
                   layer with two neurons. Each of these connects to the four neurons on the
                   next layer. Once again, all we care about are the deltas in that next layer
                   and the weights that connect the two layers. For each neuron, we find the
                   deltas for all the neurons that consume that neuron’s output, multiply those
                   by the weights, and add up the results, as shown in Figure 14-26.

                                                                                    Backpropagation   375
X      δ                                         P1          X                                    P1



Y                                                P2          Y      δ                             P2




Figure 14-26: Using backprop to find the deltas for the first hidden layer

                         When Figure 14-26 is complete, we’ve found the delta for every neuron
                    in the network.
                         Now let’s adjust the weights. We can run through the connections
                    between neurons and use the technique we saw in Figure 14-15 to update
                    every weight to a new and improved value.
                         Figure 14-23 through Figure 14-26 show why the algorithm is called
                    backward propagation. We’re taking the deltas from any layer and propagat-
                    ing, or moving, their delta (or gradient) information backward one layer at
                    a time, modifying it as we go. As we’ve seen, computing each of these delta
                    values is fast. Even when we put the activation function steps in, that doesn’t
                    add much to the computational cost.
                         Backprop becomes highly efficient when we use parallel hardware like
                    a GPU, because we can use a GPU to multiply all the deltas and weights for
                    an entire layer simultaneously. The tremendous efficiency boost that comes
                    from this parallelism is a key reason why backprop has made learning prac-
                    tical for huge neural networks.
                         Now we have all of the deltas, and we can update the weights. That’s the
                    core process of training a neural network.
                         Before we leave the discussion, though, let’s return to the issue of how
                    much we should move each weight.


      The Learning Rate
                    As we’ve mentioned, changing a weight by a lot in a single step is often a
                    recipe for trouble. The derivative is only an accurate predictor of the shape
                    of a curve for very tiny changes in the input value. If we change a weight by
                    too much, we can jump right over the smallest value of the error and even
                    find ourselves increasing the error.
                         On the other hand, if we change a weight by too little, we might see
                    only the tiniest bit of learning, requiring us to spend more time learning
                    than we should actually require. Still, that inefficiency is usually better than
                    a system that’s constantly overreacting to errors.




376    Chapter 14
    In practice, we control the amount of change to the weights during
every update with a hyperparameter called the learning rate, usually sym-
bolized by the lowercase Greek letter η (eta). This is a number between 0
and 1, and it tells the weights how much of each neuron’s newly computed
change to use when it updates.
    When we set the learning rate to 0, the weights don’t change at all.
Our system never changes and never learns. If we set the learning rate
to 1, the system applies big changes to the weights and may cause them to
increase the error, not decrease it. If this happens a lot, the network can
spend its time constantly overshooting and then compensating, with
the weights bouncing around and never settling into their best values.
Therefore, we usually set the learning rate somewhere between these
extremes. In practice, we usually set it to be only slightly larger than 0.
    Figure 14-27 shows how the learning rate is applied. Starting with
Figure 14-15, we insert an extra step to scale the value of −(Ao × Cδ) by η
before adding it back in to AC.

                                     -1




                         η




           Ao                                                Cd
  A                                 AC                                  C

Figure 14-27: The learning rate helps us control how fast the network learns by controlling
the amount by which weights change on each update.

     The best value to use for the learning rate is dependent on the spe-
cific network we’ve built and the data we’re training on. Finding a good
choice of learning rate can be essential to getting the network to learn at
all. Once the system is learning, changing this value can affect whether
that process goes quickly or slowly. Usually we have to hunt for the best
value of η using trial and error. Happily, some algorithms automate the
search for a good starting value for the learning rate and others fine-
tune the learning rate as learning progresses. As a general rule of thumb,
and if none of our other choices direct us to a particular learning rate,


                                                                       Backpropagation   377
                   we often start with a value around 0.001 and then train the network for
                   a while, watching how well it learns. Then we raise or lower it from that
                   value and train again, over and over, hunting for the value that learns
                   most efficiently. We’ll look at techniques for controlling the learning rate
                   more closely in Chapter 15.
                       Let’s see how the choice of learning rate affects the performance of
                   backprop, and thus learning.

                   Building a Binary Classifier
                   Let’s build a classifier to find the boundary between two crescent moons.
                   We will use about 1,500 points of training data, shown in Figure 14-28.




                   Figure 14-28: About 1,500 points assigned to two classes

                        Because we have only two classes, we only need a binary classifier. This
                   lets us skip the whole one-hot encoding of labels and dealing with multiple
                   outputs and instead lets us use just one output neuron. If the value is near
                   0, the input is in one class. If the output is near 1, the input is in the other
                   class.
                        Our classifier will have just two hidden layers, each with four neurons.
                   These are essentially arbitrary choices we’ve made that give us a network
                   that’s just complex enough for our discussion. As shown in Figure 14-29,
                   both layers are fully connected.
                        This network uses ReLU activation functions for the neurons in the
                   hidden layers and a sigmoid activation function on the output neuron.




378   Chapter 14
  X

                                                      Output

  Y




Figure 14-29: Our binary classifier with two inputs, four neurons in
each of the two hidden layers, and a single output neuron

     How many weights are in our network? There are four coming out of
each of the two inputs, then four times four between the layers, and then
four going into the output neuron. That gives us (2 × 4) + (4 × 4) + 4 = 28.
Each of the nine neurons also has a bias term, so our network has a total of
28 + 9 = 37 weights. They are all initialized as small random numbers. Our
goal is to use backprop to adjust those 37 weights so that the number that
comes out of the final neuron always matches the label for that sample.
     As we discussed earlier, we evaluate one sample, calculate the error,
and if the error is not zero, we compute the deltas with backprop and then
update the weights using the learning rate. Then we move on to the next
sample. Note that if the error is 0, then we don’t change anything, since the
network gave us the answer we wanted. Each time we process all the sam-
ples in the training set, we say we’ve completed one epoch of training.
     Running backprop successfully relies on making small changes to the
weights. There are two reasons for this. The first, which we’ve discussed, is
because the gradient is only accurate very near the point we’re evaluating.
If we move too far, we may find ourselves increasing the error rather than
decreasing it.
     The second reason for taking small steps is that changes in weights near
the start of the network cause changes in the outputs of neurons in later
layers, which change their deltas. To prevent everything from turning into
a terrible snarl of conflicting changes, we adjust the weights only by small
amounts.
     But what is “small”? For every network and dataset, we have to experi-
ment to find out. As we saw earlier, the size of our step is controlled by the
learning rate, or eta (η). The bigger this value, the more each weight moves
toward its new value.

Picking a Learning Rate
Let’s start with an unusually large learning rate of 0.5. Figure 14-30 shows
the boundaries computed by our network for our test data, using a different
background color for each class.




                                                                       Backpropagation   379
                    Figure 14-30: The boundaries computed by our network using a learning rate of 0.5

                         This is terrible: there don’t seem to be any boundaries at all! Everything
                    is being assigned to a single class, shown by the light orange background.
                    If we look at the accuracy and error (or loss) after each epoch, we get the
                    graphs of Figure 14-31.




Figure 14-31: Accuracy and loss for our half-moons data with a learning rate of 0.5

                         Things are looking bad. As we’d expect, the accuracy is just about
                    0.5, meaning that half the points are being misclassified. This makes
                    sense, since the red and blue points are roughly evenly divided. If we




380    Chapter 14
assign them all to one class, as we’re doing here, half of those assign-
ments will be wrong. The loss, or error, starts high and doesn’t fall. If we
let the network run for hundreds of epochs, it continues on in this way,
never improving.
     What are the weights doing? Figure 14-32 shows the values of all
37 weights during training.




Figure 14-32: The weights of our network when using a learning rate of 0.5. One weight
is constantly changing and overshooting its goal, while the others are making changes
too small to show on this graph.

     The graph is dominated by one weight that’s jumping all over. That
weight is one of those going into the output neuron, trying to move its out-
put around to match the label. That weight goes up, then down, then up,
jumping too far almost every time, then overcorrecting by too much, then
overcorrecting for that, and so on. The other neurons are changing too, but
at too small a scale to see in this graph.
     These results are disappointing, but they’re not shocking, because a
learning rate of 0.5 is big. That’s what’s causing all the erratic bouncing
around in Figure 14-32.
     Let’s reduce the training rate by a factor of 10 to a more reasonable
(though still big) value of 0.05. We’ll change absolutely nothing else about
the network or the data, and we’ll even reuse the same sequence of pseudo-
random numbers to initialize the weights. The new boundaries are shown
in Figure 14-33.




                                                                    Backpropagation   381
                    Figure 14-33: The decision boundaries when we use a learning rate of 0.05

                         This is much better! Looking at the graphs in Figure 14-34 reveals
                    that we’ve reached 100 percent accuracy on both the training and test
                    sets after about 16 epochs. Using a smaller learning rate gave us a huge
                    improvement.




Figure 14-34: Accuracy and loss for our network when using a learning rate of 0.05




382    Chapter 14
   This shows us the importance of tuning the learning rate for every new
combination of network and data. If a network refuses to learn, we can
sometimes make things better by simply reducing the learning rate.
   What are the weights doing now? Figure 14-35 shows us their history.




Figure 14-35: The weights in our network over time, using a learning rate of 0.05

     Overall, this is way better, because lots of weights are changing. They’re
getting pretty large, which can itself inhibit or slow down learning. We usu-
ally want our weights to be in a small range, typically [–1, 1]. We’ll see some
ways to control weight values when we discuss regularization in Chapter 15.
     Figure 14-33 and Figure 14-34 are pictures of success. Our network
has learned to perfectly classify the data, and it did it in only 16 epochs,
which is nice and fast (in fact, the graphs show us that it really took only 10
epochs). On a late 2014 iMac without GPU support, the whole training pro-
cess for 16 epochs took less than 10 seconds.

An Even Smaller Learning Rate
What if we lower the learning rate down to 0.01? Now the weights change
even more slowly. Does this produce better results?
    Figure 14-36 shows the decision boundary resulting from these tiny
steps. The boundary seems simpler than the boundary in Figure 14-33, but
both boundaries separate the sets perfectly.




                                                                      Backpropagation   383
                    Figure 14-36: The decision boundaries for a learning rate of 0.01

                        Figure 14-37 shows our accuracy and loss graphs. Because our learning
                    rate is so much slower, our network takes around 170 epochs to get to 100
                    percent accuracy, rather than the 16 in Figure 14-35.




Figure 14-37: The accuracy and learning rate for our network using a learning rate of 0.01

                        These graphs show an interesting learning behavior. After an initial
                    jump, both the training and test accuracies reach about 90 percent and
                    plateau there. At the same time, the losses plateau as well. Then around
                    epoch 170, things improve rapidly again, with the accuracy climbing to 100
                    percent and the errors dropping to zero.


384    Chapter 14
     This pattern of alternating improvement and plateaus is not unusual,
and we can even see a hint of a plateau in Figure 14-34 between epochs 3
and 8. These plateaus come from the weights finding themselves on nearly
flat regions of the error surface, resulting in near-zero gradients, and thus
their updates are very small.
     Though our weights might be getting stuck in a local minimum, it’s
more common for them to get caught in a flat region of a saddle, like those
we saw in Chapter 5 (Dauphin et al. 2014). Sometimes it takes a long time
for one of the weights to move into a region where the gradient is large
enough to give it a good push. When one weight gets moving, it’s com-
mon to see the others kick in as well, thanks to the cascading effect of that
weight’s changes on the rest of the network.
     The values of the weights follow almost the same pattern over time,
as shown in Figure 14-38. The interesting thing is that at least some of the
weights are not flat or on a plateau near the middle of our training process.
They’re changing, but slowly. The system is getting better, but in tiny steps
that don’t show up in the performance graphs until the changes become
bigger around epoch 170.




Figure 14-38: The history of our weights using a learning rate of 0.01

     So, was there any benefit to lowering the learning rate down to 0.01? In
this case, not really. Even at 0.05, the classification was already perfect on
both the training and test data. For this network and this data, the smaller
learning rate just meant the network took longer to learn. This investiga-
tion has shown us how sensitive the network is to our choice of learning
rate. We want to find a value that’s not too big, or too small, but just right
(Pyle 1918).

                                                                         Backpropagation   385
                        We usually do this kind of experimenting with the learning rate as
                    part of developing nearly every deep learning network. We need to find a
                    value that does the best job on each specific network and data. Happily, in
                    Chapter 15 we’ll see algorithms that can automatically adjust the learning
                    rate for us in sophisticated ways.


      Summary
                    This chapter was all about backpropagation. We saw that we can predict
                    how the error of a network will change in response to a change in each
                    weight. If we can determine whether each weight should increase or
                    decrease in value, we can reduce the error.
                        To find how we should change each weight, we started by assigning a
                    delta value to each neuron. This value tells us the relationship between
                    a change in a weight’s value and a change in the final error. This enabled
                    us to determine how to change each weight in order to reduce the error.
                        The computation of these deltas proceeds from the final layer back-
                    ward to the first. Because the gradient information needed to compute the
                    delta for each neuron is propagated backward one layer at a time, we get
                    the name backpropagation. Backprop can be implemented on a GPU, where
                    we can carry out the calculations for many neurons simultaneously.
                        It’s important to keep in mind that backprop is propagating the gradi-
                    ent of the error, which is the information that tells us how the error changes
                    when the weight changes. Some authors casually speak of backprop as prop-
                    agating the error, but that’s a misleading simplification. We’re propagating
                    the gradient, which tells us how to manipulate the weights to improve the
                    network’s output.
                        Now that we know whether each weight should be adjusted to be larger
                    or smaller, we need to decide how big a change to actually make. That’s
                    exactly what we’ll figure out in the next chapter.




386    Chapter 14
