=== DLV p542-543 (pdf 572-573): fine-tuning / transfer learning
                          Now we can create a computer-friendly, numerical representation of any
                    sentence. We can generate more text by handing this list of numbers to a
                    trained autoregressive network. The network predicts the number of the next
                    word, that word gets appended to the words used as its input, the network
                    then predicts the next word, which again gets appended to the words used as
                    its input, and so on. For us to see what text this corresponds to, we can turn
                    each number back into its corresponding word. For many of our discussions
                    in the following pages, we take these transformations into numbers as a given
                    and illustrate our inputs and outputs as words, not numbers. We’ll see later
                    that while a single number is workable, there’s a much richer way to represent
                    words that includes their context and how they’re used in a sentence.

                    Fine-Tuning and Downstream Networks
                    It’s often useful to train a system on a generic database and then specialize
                    it. For example, we might enhance a general-purpose image classifier into
                    one that can recognize leaf shapes and tell us what kind of tree they came
                    from. The process is called transfer learning. When used with a classifier,
                    it often involves freezing the existing network, adding a few new layers at
                    the end of the classification section, and training those. That way, the new
                    layers can make use of all the information that the existing network has
                    learned to extract from each image.
                          In NLP, we say that a system that has learned from a general data-
                    base is pretrained. Then when we want to learn a new type of specialized
                    language, like the language used in law, poetry, or engineering, we fine-
                    tune the network with the new data. Unlike transfer learning, we typically
                    modify all the weights in the system when we fine-tune.
                          If we don’t want to retrain the system, we can create a second model to
                    take the language system’s output and turn it into something more useful
                    to us, which is close in spirit to transfer learning. Here the language model
                    is frozen, and its output is fed to a new model. We call this second model
                    a downstream network, which carries out a downstream task. Some language
                    models are designed to create rich, dense summaries of their input text so
                    they can be used to drive a wide variety of downstream tasks.
                          These two approaches of fine-tuning and downstream training are use-
                    ful conceptual distinctions, but in practice, many systems blend together
                    some of both techniques.


      Fully Connected Prediction
                    As we’ve discussed, we’re going to treat language as sequences of numbers.
                    To get a feeling for working with such sequences in general, let’s set aside
                    language for a moment and focus just on the numbers. We’ll build a tiny
                    network that learns to take in a few numbers from a sequence, and produce
                    the next number. We’ll do it in perhaps the simplest possible way, with just
                    two layers: a fully connected layer of a mere five neurons, followed by a fully
                    connected layer with a single neuron, as in Figure 19-1. We’ll use a leaky


542    Chapter 19
ReLU activation function with slope 0.1 on the first layer and no activation
function on the output layer.




       5                          1
  leaky ReLU                    no AF
Figure 19-1: A tiny network for sequence prediction


Testing Our Network
To try out this tiny network, let’s use a synthetic dataset created by add-
ing a bunch of sine waves together. The first 500 samples are shown
in Figure 19-2.




Figure 19-2: Synthetic training data

    To train our system, we’ll take the first five values from our dataset and
ask our little network to produce the sixth value. Then we’ll take values 2
through 6 of the dataset and ask it to predict the seventh value. We say that
we’re using a sliding window to choose each set of inputs, as in Figure 19-3.

  Inputs



Sample 1


Sample 2


Sample 3

Sample 4



Figure 19-3: Using a sliding window to create training samples,
shown in blue, from 5-element sequences of the training data. The
value we want to predict for each sample is in red.

                                                              Recurrent Neural Networks   543
=== DLV p582-583 (pdf 612-613): skip connections
                       This approach first appeared in a paper with the great title, “Attention
                   Is All You Need” (Vaswani et al. 2017). The authors called their attention-
                   based model a transformer (an unfortunately ambiguous name, but it’s now
                   firmly stuck in the language of the field). The transformer model works so
                   well that we now have a new class of language models that not only can be
                   trained in parallel, but also can outperform RNNs in a wide variety of tasks.
                       Transformers use three more ideas we haven’t discussed yet. Let’s cover
                   them now, so when we get to the actual transformer architecture, it will be
                   smooth sailing.

                   Skip Connections
                   The first new idea we cover is called a residual connection or skip connec-
                   tion (He et al. 2015). The inspiration is to reduce the amount of work that’s
                   required of a deep network layer.
                        Let’s start with an analogy. Suppose you’re painting a real, physical
                   portrait using acrylic paints on canvas. After weeks of sittings, the portrait
                   is done, and you send it to your subject for their approval. They say that they
                   like it, but they regret having worn a particular ring on one finger, and wish
                   they’d worn a different one that they like more. Can you change that?
                        One way to proceed would be to invite your subject back to the studio
                   and paint a whole new portrait from scratch on a blank canvas, only this
                   time with the new ring on their finger. That would require a lot of time and
                   effort. If they’d allow it, a more expeditious approach would be to take the
                   portrait you have, and unobtrusively paint the new ring over the old one.
                        Now consider a layer in a deep network. A tensor comes in, and the
                   layer does some processing to change that tensor. If the layer only needs to
                   change the input by small amounts, or only in some places, then it would be
                   wasteful to expend resources processing the parts of the tensor that don’t
                   need to change. Just as with the painting, it would be much more efficient
                   for the layer to compute only the changes it wants to make. Then it can
                   combine those changes with the original input to produce its output.
                        This idea works beautifully in deep learning networks. It lets us make
                   layers that are smaller and faster, and it even improves the flow of gradients
                   in backpropagation, which lets us efficiently train networks of dozens or
                   even hundreds of layers.
                        The mechanism is shown on the left side of Figure 20-17. We feed an
                   input tensor to some layer as usual, let it compute the changes, and then we
                   add the layer’s output to its input tensor.




                   Figure 20-17: Left: A skip connection, shown in red. Right: We can place a skip connec-
                   tion around multiple layers.




582   Chapter 20
    The extra line in the drawing that carries the input to the addition
node is called a skip connection, or a residual connection because of its math-
ematical interpretation.
    We can place a skip connection around multiple layers in sequence, if
we like, as on the right of Figure 20-17.
    The skip connection works because each layer is trying to reduce its
own contribution to the final error, while participating in the network
made up of all the other layers. The skip connection is part of the network,
so the layer learns it doesn’t need to process the parts of the tensor that
don’t change. This makes the layer’s job simpler, enabling it to be smaller
and faster.
    We’ll see later that transformers use skip connections not just for effi-
ciency and speed, but also because they allow the transformer to cleverly
keep track of the location of each element in its input.

Norm-Add
The second idea on our road to transformers is really more of a conceptual
and notational shorthand. In transformers, we usually apply a regulariza-
tion step called layer normalization, or layer norm, to the outputs of a layer, as
shown on the left in Figure 20-18 (Vaswani et al. 2017). Layer norm belongs
to the class of regularization techniques that we saw in Chapter 15, such
as dropout and batchnorm, which help control overfitting by keeping the
values flowing through the network from getting too big or too small. The
layer norm step learns to adjust the values coming out of a layer so that they
approximate the shape of a Gaussian bump with a mean of 0 and standard
deviation of 1.




Figure 20-18: Left: A layer normalization followed by the addition step of a skip connec-
tion. Right: A combined icon for norm-add. This is just a visual and conceptual shorthand
for the network on the left.

     Performing layer norms is important in getting a transformer to
work well, but there’s some flexibility about exactly where this step can be
located. A popular approach places the layer norm just before the addition
step of a skip connection, as in the left side of Figure 20-18. Since these
two operations always come in pairs, it’s convenient to combine them into
a single operation that we call norm-add. Our icon for norm-add is a combi-
nation of the layer norm and summation icons, and is shown on the right
in Figure 20-18. This is just a visual shorthand for the two separate steps of
layer norm followed by skip connection addition.
     People have experimented with other locations for the layer norm oper-
ation, such as before the layer (Vaswani et al. 2017), or after the addition
node (TensorFlow 2020b). These approaches differ in their details, but in



                                                                Attention and Transformers   583
