                                   17
                  CON V NE T S IN PR AC TICE




                      In the last chapter we discussed convolu-
                      tion, and we wrapped up with a simpli-
                    fied example of a convolutional network,
                 or convnet.
             In this chapter, we look at two real convnets designed for image clas-
        sification. The first identifies grayscale handwritten digits, and the second
        identifies what object is dominant in a color photograph, choosing from
        1,000 different categories.


Categorizing Handwritten Digits
        Categorizing handwritten digits is a famous problem in machine learning
        (LeCun et al. 1989), thanks to a freely available dataset called MNIST (pro-
        nounced em´-nist). It contains 60,000 hand-drawn digits from 0 to 9, each a
        grayscale picture rendered in white on a 28 by 28 black background, with
        a label identifying the digit. The drawings were collected from census tak-
        ers and students. Our job is to identify the digit in each image.
                           We will use a simple convnet designed for this job that is included
                       with the Keras machine learning library (Chollet 2017). Figure 17-1 shows
                       the architecture in our schematic form and in the traditional box-and-
                       label form.


28 x 28 x 1                                                                                                  10

                    32 x (3x3)    64 x (3x3)       2 x2    0.25           128        0.25      10
                      ReLU          ReLU                                 ReLU                softmax




                      Conv 2D          Conv 2D
                                                          MaxPool      Dropout
28 x 28 x 1          32 x (3x3)       64 x (3x3)
                                                            2x2         0.25
                       ReLU             ReLU




                                                             Dense         Dropout          Dense 10
                                               Flatten                                                       10
                                                            128 ReLU        0.25             softmax

Figure 17-1: A convnet for classifying MNIST digits. The input images are 28 by 28 by 1 channel. Two con-
volution layers are followed by pooling, dropout, and flatten, then a dense (or fully connected) layer, another
dropout, and a final dense layer with 10 outputs followed by softmax. Top: Our schematic version. Bottom:
Traditional box-and-label form.

                            The input to the net is the MNIST image, provided as a 3D tensor of
                       shape 28 by 28 by 1 (the 1 refers to the single grayscale channel). Though
                       there are two fully connected layers at the end, and various helper layers
                       (such as dropout, flatten, and pooling), we still refer to this as a convolu-
                       tional network, or convnet, because the convolution layers dominate the
                       classification work. The first convolution layer runs 32 filters, each of size 3
                       by 3, over the input. Each filter’s output is run through a ReLU activation
                       function before it leaves the layer.
                            By not specifying a stride, the filters will move by one element in each
                       direction. We’re also not applying any padding. As we saw in Figure 16-10,
                       this means that we lose a ring of elements after each convolution. That’s
                       okay in this case because all MNIST images are supposed to have a border
                       of four black pixels around the digit (not all images actually have this bor-
                       der, but most do).
                            The first layer’s input tensor is 28 by 28 by 1, so each filter in the first
                       convolution layer is one channel deep. Because we have 32 filters, we don’t
                       have any padding on the input, and the filters have a 3 by 3 footprint,
                       the output of the first convolution layer is 26 by 26 by 32. The second




474    Chapter 17
convolution layer contains 64 filters with 3 by 3 footprints. The system
knows that the input has 32 channels (because the previous layer had 32
filters), so each filter is created as a tensor of shape 3 by 3 by 32. Because
we’re still not using padding, we again lose a ring around the outside of the
input, producing an output tensor that’s 24 by 24 by 64.
     We could have used striding to reduce the size of the output, but here
we use an explicit max pooling layer with blocks of size 2 by 2. That means
for every nonoverlapping 2 by 2 block in the input, the layer outputs just
one value containing the largest value in the block. Thus, the output of this
layer is a tensor of size 12 by 12 by 64 (the pooling doesn’t change the num-
ber of channels).
     Next, we come to a dropout layer, represented by a diagonal slash.
As we saw in Chapter 15, the dropout layer itself doesn’t actually do any
processing. Instead, it instructs the system to apply dropout to the near-
est preceding layer that contains neurons. The nearest layer preceding
the dropout is pooling, but that has no neurons. As we continue to work
backward, we find a convolution layer, which does have neurons. During
training, the dropout algorithm is applied to this convolution layer (recall
that dropout is only applied during training, and is otherwise ignored).
Before each epoch of training, one-quarter of the neurons in this convo-
lution layer are temporarily disabled. This should help hold off overfit-
ting. By convention, we usually treat dropout as a layer, even though it
does no computation. Note that since the dropout layer looks backward
for the nearest layer with neurons, we could have placed it to the left of
the pooling layer and nothing about the network would have changed. By
convention, when we pool after convolution, we usually place those two
layers together.
     Now we leave the convolutional part of the network and prepare the
values for output. We typically find these steps, or something like them, at
the end of classification convnets. The output of the second convolution
layer is a 3D tensor, but we want to feed that into a fully connected layer,
which expects a list (or 1D tensor). A flatten layer, shown as two parallel
lines, takes an input tensor of any number of dimensions and reorganizes
it into a 1D tensor by placing all the elements together end-to-end. The list
is made up starting with the first row in the tensor. We take the first ele-
ment, and place its 64 values at the head of our list. Then we move to the
second element, and place its 64 values at the end of the list. We continue
doing this for every element in the row, and then we do it for the next row,
and so on. Figure 17-2 shows the process. None of the values in the tensor
are lost in this rearrangement.




                                                           Convnets in Practice   475
                   Figure 17-2: The action of a flatten layer. Top: The input tensor. Middle: Turning each
                   channel into a list. Bottom: Placing the lists one after the other to make one large list.

                       Returning to Figure 17-1, the flatten layer produces a list of 12 × 12 ×
                   64 = 9,216 numbers. That list goes into a fully connected, or dense, layer
                   of 128 neurons. That layer gets affected by dropout, where a quarter of the
                   neurons are temporarily disconnected at the start of each batch during
                   training.
                       The 128 outputs of this layer go into a final dense layer with 10 neu-
                   rons. The 10 outputs of this layer go into a softmax step so that they’re con-
                   verted to probabilities. The 10 numbers that come out of this last layer give
                   us the network’s prediction of the probability that the input image belongs
                   to each of the 10 possible classes, corresponding to the digits 0 through 9.
                       We trained this network for 12 epochs using the standard MNIST train-
                   ing data. Its accuracy on the training and validation data sets is shown in
                   Figure 17-3.
                       The curves show we’ve achieved about 99 percent accuracy on both the
                   training and validation data sets. Since the curves aren’t diverging, we’ve
                   successfully avoided overfitting.




476   Chapter 17
Figure 17-3: The training performance of our convnet in Figure 17-2. We trained for 12
epochs, and since the training and validation curves are not diverging, we’ve successfully
avoided overfitting, while reaching about 99 percent accuracy on both data sets.

   Let’s look at some predictions. Figure 17-4 shows some images from the
MNIST validation set, labeled by the digit that the network gave the largest
probability to. On this little set of examples, it did a perfect job.




Figure 17-4: These are 24 randomly chosen images from the MNIST validation set. Each
image is labeled with the output of the network, showing the digit with the highest prob-
ability. The network classified all 24 of these digits correctly.

    Just two convolution layers gave this system enough power to achieve 99
percent accuracy.




                                                                     Convnets in Practice   477
      VGG16
                   Let’s look at a bigger and more powerful convnet, called VGG16. It was
                   trained to analyze color photographs and identify the dominant object in
                   each photo by assigning probabilities to 1,000 different classes.
                        VGG16 was trained on a famous dataset that was used as part of a con-
                   test. The ILSVRC2014 competition was a public challenge in 2014. The goal
                   was to build a neural network for classifying photos in a provided database of
                   images (Russakovsky et al. 2015). The acronym ILSVRC stands for ImageNet
                   Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge, so the database of pictures is
                   often called the ImageNet database. The ImageNet photo database is freely
                   available online and is still widely used for training and testing new networks
                   (newer, bigger versions of ImageNet are also available [Fei-Fei et al. 2020]).
                        The original ImageNet database contained 1.2 million images, each
                   manually labeled with one of 1,000 labels, describing the object most prom-
                   inent in the photo. The challenge actually included several subchallenges,
                   each with its own winners (ImageNet 2020). The winner of one of the
                   classification tasks was VGG16 (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014). VGG is an
                   acronym for the Visual Geometry Group, who developed the system. The 16
                   refers to the network’s 16 computational layers (there are also some utility
                   layers, such as dropout and flatten, that don’t do computation).
                        VGG16 broke records for accuracy when it won the contest, and even
                   though years have passed, it remains popular. This is largely because it still
                   does very well at classifying images (even compared to newer, more sophis-
                   ticated systems), and it has a simple structure that’s easy to modify and
                   experiment with. The authors have released all the weights and how they
                   preprocessed the training data. Even better, every deep learning library
                   makes it easy to create a fully trained instance of VGG16 in our own code.
                   Thanks to all of these qualities, VGG16 is a frequent starting point for proj-
                   ects that involve image classification.
                        Let’s look at the VGG16 architecture. Most of the work is done by a
                   series of convolution layers. Utility layers appear along the way, and some
                   flattening and fully connected layers appear at the very end, as they did in
                   Figure 17-1.
                        Before we feed any data to our model, we must preprocess it in the same
                   way that the authors preprocessed their training data. That involves making
                   sure that each channel has been adjusted by subtracting a specific value from
                   all of its pixels (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014). To better discuss the shapes
                   of the tensors flowing through the network, let’s assume each input image
                   has a height and width of 224 to match the dimensions of the Imagenet data
                   the network was trained on, and its colors have been correctly pre-processed.
                   Once that’s done, we’re ready to feed our image to the network.
                        We will present the VGG16 architecture as a series of six groups of
                   ­layers. These groups are strictly conceptual and are just a way of gathering
                    together related layers for our discussion. The first few groups have the
                    same structure: two or three layers of convolution followed by a pooling
                    layer.
                        Group 1 is shown in Figure 17-5.

478   Chapter 17
   Input:
224 x 224 x 3
                   64 x (3x3)       64 x (3x3)       2x2
                     ReLU             ReLU

Figure 17-5: Group 1 of VGG16. We convolve the input tensor with 64 filters
each of size 3 by 3. Then we convolve again with 64 new filters. Finally, we
use max pooling to reduce the output tensor’s height and width by half.

     The convolutions both apply zero padding to their inputs so there’s no
loss in width or height. The max pooling step uses nonoverlapping blocks
of size 2 by 2.
     All of the convolution layers in VGG16 use the default ReLU activation
function.
     We’ve seen how useful pooling is for helping our filters recognize pat-
terns even if they’ve been displaced. For the same reasons that we used
pooling when matching masks in Chapter 16, we apply pooling here, too.
     The output of the group in Figure 17-5 is a tensor of dimensions 112 by
112 by 64. The values of 112 come from the input dimensions of 224 by 224
that have been halved, and the 64 results from the 64 filters in the second
convolution layer.
     Group 2 is just like the first, only now we apply 128 filters in each convo-
lution layer. Figure 17-6 shows the layers. The output of this group has size
56 by 56 by 128.




  128 x (3x3)        128 x (3x3)        2x2
    ReLU               ReLU

Figure 17-6: Group 2 of VGG16 is just like the first block in Figure 17-5,
except that we use 128 filters in each convolution layer rather than 64.

     Group 3 continues the pattern of doubling the number of filters in each
convolution layer, but it repeats the convolution step three times instead of
twice. Figure 17-7 shows Group 3. The tensor after the max pooling step has
size 28 by 28 by 256.




 256 x (3x3)       256 x (3x3)        256 x (3x3)        2x2
   ReLU              ReLU               ReLU

Figure 17-7: Group 3 of VGG16 doubles the number of filters again to 256
and repeats the convolution step three times rather than two as before.




                                                                       Convnets in Practice   479
                        Groups 4 and 5 of the network are the same. Each group is built from
                    three steps of convolution with 512 filters, followed by a max pooling layer.
                    The structure of these layers is shown in Figure 17-8. The tensor coming
                    out of Group 4 has size 28 by 28 by 512, and the tensor after the max pool-
                    ing layer in Group 5 has dimensions 14 by 14 by 512.




                      512 x (3x3)         512 x (3x3)     512 x (3x3)        2x2
                        ReLU                ReLU            ReLU
                    Figure 17-8: Groups 4 and 5 of VGG16 are the same. They each have
                    three convolution layers, followed by a two by two max pooling layer.

                         This ends the convolution part of the network, and now we come to the
                    wrap-up. As with the MNIST classifier we saw in Figure 17-1, we first flatten
                    the tensor coming out of Group 5. We then run it through two dense layers
                    of 4,096 neurons, each using ReLU, and each followed by dropout with an
                    aggressive setting of 50 percent. Finally, the output goes into a dense layer
                    with 1,000 neurons. The results are fed to softmax, which produces our out-
                    put of 1,000 probabilities, one for each class that VGG16 was trained to rec-
                    ognize. These final steps, which are typical for classification networks of this
                    style, are shown in Figure 17-9.

                                                                                    Output:
                                                                                     1000
                              4096         0.5    4096       0.5    1000
                              ReLU                ReLU             softmax
                    Figure 17-9: The final steps of processing in VGG16. We flatten the image,
                    then run it through two dense layers each using ReLU, followed by dropout,
                    then through a dense layer with softmax.

                          Figure 17-10 shows the whole architecture in one place.
                             2 times               2 times                3 times

             Input:
         3 x 224 x 224
                            64 x (3x3)      2x2   128 x (3x3)   2x2      256 x (3x3)     2x2
                              ReLU                  ReLU                   ReLU



       3 times               3 times

                                                                                                       Output

      512 x (3x3)   2x2     512 x (3x3)     2x2          4096      0.5    4096         0.5    1000
        ReLU                  ReLU                       ReLU             ReLU               softmax

Figure 17-10: The VGG16 architecture in one place

480    Chapter 17
             This network works very well. Figure 17-11 shows four pictures shot
         around Seattle on a phone’s camera.




         Figure 17-11: Four photos shot around Seattle on a sunny day. The convnet of Figure 17-10
         does a great job of identifying each image.

              The convnet has never seen these images, but it does a great job with
         them. Even the ambiguous round object in the upper right is assigned sen-
         sible labels.
              Let’s take a closer look at what’s going on inside VGG16 by looking at its
         filters.


Visualizing Filters, Part 1
         VGG16’s success in classifying is due to the filters that were learned by its
         convolution layers. It’s tempting to look at the filters and see what they’ve
         learned, but the filters themselves are big blocks of numbers, which are
         hard for us to interpret. Instead of trying to somehow make sense of a block
         of numbers, we can visualize our filters indirectly by creating images that
         trigger them. In other words, once we’ve selected a filter we want to visual-
         ize, we can find a picture that causes that filter to output its biggest value.
         That picture shows us what that filter is looking for.


                                                                            Convnets in Practice   481
                         We can do this with a little trick based on gradient descent, the algo-
                    rithm that we saw in Chapter 14 as part of backpropagation. We flip gradi-
                    ent descent around to create gradient ascent, which we use to climb up the
                    gradient and increase the system’s error. Remember from Chapter 14 that
                    during training, we use the system’s error to create gradients that we push
                    backward through the network with backprop, enabling us to change the
                    weights in order to reduce that error. For filter visualization, we’re going to
                    ignore the network’s output and its error entirely. The only output we care
                    about is the feature map that comes out of the particular filter (or neuron)
                    we want to visualize. We know that when the filter sees information that it’s
                    looking for, it produces a big output, so if we add up all of the output values
                    of that filter for a given input image, it tells us how much of what the filter
                    is looking for is in that image. We can use the sum of all the values in the
                    feature map as a replacement for the network’s error.
                         Figure 17-12 shows the idea.

                                                      VGG16
                          Block 1                          Block 2                   Block 5




                                                       Filter 17




Figure 17-12: Visualizing a filter. The sum of all the values in the feature map serves as the network’s error.

                        We’re using VGG16, but for this visualization process we leave off the
                    layers after the last convolution. We feed in a grid of random numbers and
                    extract the filter map for the filter we want to visualize. That becomes our
                    error. Now comes the tricky part: we use this error to compute the gradi-
                    ents, but we don’t adjust the weights at all. The network itself and all of its
                    weights are frozen. We just keep computing the gradients and pushing them
                    back until we reach the input layer, which holds the pixel values of the
                    input image. The gradients that arrive at this layer tell us how to change
                    those pixel values to decrease the error, which we know is the filter’s out-
                    put. Since we want to stimulate the neuron as much as we can, we want the
                    “error” to be as big as possible, so we change the pixel values to increase,
                    rather than decrease, this error. That makes the picture stimulate our
                    selected neuron a little more than it did before.
                        After doing this over and over, we will have adjusted our initially ran-
                    dom pixel values so that they’re making the filter output the biggest values
                    we can get it to produce. When we look at the input after it’s been modified



482    Chapter 17
in this way, we see a picture that makes that neuron produce a huge output,
so the picture shows us what the filter is looking for (or at least gives us a
general idea) (Zeiler and Fergus 2013). We will use this visualization pro-
cess again in Chapter 23 when we look at the deep dreaming algorithm.
     Because we start with random values in the input image, we get a dif-
ferent final image every time we run this algorithm. But each image we
make is roughly like the others, since they’re all based on maximizing the
output of the same filter.
     Let’s look at some images produced by this method. Figure 17-13 shows
pictures produced for the 64 filters in the second convolution layer in the
first block, or group, of VGG16 (we use the label block1_conv2 for this layer
and similar names for the other layers we look at). In Figure 17-13 and the
others like it to come, we’ve enhanced the color saturation to make the
results easier to interpret.




Figure 17-13: Images that get the biggest response from each of the
64 filters in the block1_conv2 layer of VGG16




                                                                      Convnets in Practice   483
                        It seems that a lot of these layers are looking for edges in different ori-
                   entations. Some have values that are too subtle for us to interpret easily.
                        Let’s move forward to block 3, and look at the first 64 filters from the
                   first convolution layer there. Figure 17-14 shows images that stimulate these
                   filters the most.




                   Figure 17-14: Images that get the biggest response from the first 64 filters in the
                   block3_conv1 layer of VGG16


                        Now we’re talking! As we’d expect, the filters here are looking for more
                   complex textures, combining the simpler patterns found by prior layers.
                   Let’s move farther along and look at the first 64 filters from the first convo-
                   lution layer of block 4, in Figure 17-15.




484   Chapter 17
Figure 17-15: Images that get the biggest response from the first 64 filters in the block4_
conv1 layer of VGG16


     These are fascinating glimpses into what VGG16 has learned. We can
see some of the structures it has found to be useful in order to classify the
object in an image. The filters seem to be hunting for patterns that involve
a lot of different kinds of flowing and interlocking textures like those we’d
find on animals and other surfaces in the world around us.
     We can really see the value of the convolution hierarchy here. Each
layer of convolution looks for patterns in the output of the previous layer,
letting us work our way up from low-level details like stripes and edges to
complex and rich geometrical structures.




                                                                       Convnets in Practice   485
                      Just for fun, let’s look at close-ups of a few of these filters. Figure 17-16
                   shows larger views of nine patterns from the first few layers.




                   Figure 17-16: Close-ups of some manually selected images that triggered the largest filter
                   responses from the first few layers of VGG16

                        Figure 17-17 shows patterns that triggered big responses from filters in
                   the last few layers.
                        These patterns are exciting and beautiful. They also have an organic
                   feeling about them, probably because the ImageNet database ­contains
                   many images of animals.




486   Chapter 17
         Figure 17-17: Close-ups of some manually selected images that triggered the largest filter
         responses from the last few layers of VGG16




Visualizing Filters, Part 2
         Another way to visualize a filter is to run an image through VGG16, and
         look at the feature map produced by that filter. That is, we feed an image
         to VGG16 and let it run through the network, but as before, we ignore
         the network’s output. Instead, we extract the feature map for the filter
         we’re interested in, and draw it like a picture. This is possible because
         each feature map always has a single channel, so we can draw it as a
         grayscale image.
             Let’s give it a spin. Figure 17-18 shows our input image of a drake, or
         male duck. This is the starting image for all of our visualizations in this
         section.




                                                                              Convnets in Practice   487
                   Figure 17-18 The drake image that we use to visualize filter outputs

                       To get a feeling for things, Figure 17-19 shows the response from the
                   very first filter on the very first convolution layer of the network. Since the
                   output of a filter has just one channel, we can draw it in grayscale. We’ve
                   chosen to instead use a heatmap from black to reds to yellow.




                   Figure 17-19: The response of filter 0 in layer block1_conv1 in VGG16 to the
                   duck image in Figure 17-18


488   Chapter 17
     This filter is looking for edges. Consider the tail in the lower right. An
edge that’s light on top and darker below gets a very large output from the
filter, whereas an edge in the other direction gets a very low output. Less
extreme changes cause smaller outputs, and regions of constant color have
middling outputs.
     Figure 17-20 shows the responses from the first 32 filters in the first con-
volution layer of the first block.




Figure 17-20: The responses of the first 32 filters in VGG convolution layer block1_conv1

    A lot of these filters seem to be looking for edges, but others seem to
be looking for particular features of the image. Let’s look at close-ups of
8 manually selected filters chosen from all 64 of the filters on this layer,
shown in Figure 17-21.




Figure 17-21: Close-ups of eight manually chosen filter responses from VGG16’s first con-
volution layer, block1_conv1




                                                                     Convnets in Practice   489
                        The third image in the top row seems to be looking for the duck’s feet,
                   or maybe it’s just interested in bright orange things. The left-most image in
                   the bottom row looks like it’s searching for the waves and sand behind the
                   duck, though the image to its right appears to be responding most to the
                   blue waves. Some more experimentation with other inputs would help us
                   nail down these interpretations, but it’s fun to see how much we can guess
                   from a single image.
                        Let’s move farther into the network, out to the third block of con­
                   volution layers. The outputs here are smaller by a factor of four on
                   each side than those coming out of the first block because they’ve gone
                   through two pooling layers. We expect that they are looking for clusters
                   of features. Figure 17-22 shows the responses for the first convolution layer
                   in block 3.




                   Figure 17-22: The responses of the first 32 filters in the VGG convolution layer
                   block3_conv1


                       It’s interesting that a lot of edge finding still seems to be going on. This
                   suggests that strong edges are an important cue for VGG16 as it works to
                   figure out what an image is showing, even in the third set of convolutions.
                   But lots of other regions are also bright.
                       Let’s jump all the way to the last block. Figure 17-23 shows the
                   responses for the first 32 filters for the first convolution layer in
                   block 5.




490   Chapter 17
        Figure 17-23: Filter responses for the first 32 filters in VGG convolution layer block5_conv1

             As we’d expect, these images are even smaller, having passed through
        two more pooling layers that each reduce the size by a factor of two on each
        side. At this point, the duck is hardly visible because the system is combin-
        ing features from the previous layers. Some of the filters are barely respond-
        ing. They are probably responsible for finding high-level features that aren’t
        present in the duck image.
             In Chapter 23 we’ll look at a couple of creative applications that use the
        filter responses in a convnet.


Adversaries
        Although VGG16 does very well at predicting the correct label for many
        images, we can change an image in ways so small that they’re undetect-
        able to the human eye, but that fools the classifier into assigning the wrong
        label. In fact, this process can mess up the results of any convolution-based
        classifier.
             The trick to fooling a convnet involves creating a new image called
        an adversary. This image is created from the starting image by adding an
        adversarial perturbation (or more simply, a perturbation). The perturbation
        is another image, the same size as the image we want to classify, typically
        with very small values. If we add the perturbation to our original image,
        the changes are usually so small that most people can’t detect any differ-
        ence, even in the finest details. But if we ask VGG16 to classify the perturbed
        image, it gives us the wrong answer. Sometimes we can find a single pertur-
        bation that messes up the results for every image we give to a particular clas-
        sifier, which we call a universal perturbation (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. 2016).




                                                                               Convnets in Practice   491
                        Let’s see this in action. On the left of Figure 17-24 we see an image of
                   a tiger. All of the pixel values in this image are between 0 and 255. The sys-
                   tem correctly classifies it as a tiger with about 80 percent confidence, with
                   smaller confidences for related animals such as a tiger cat and a jaguar.




                   Figure 17-24: An adversarial attack on an image. Left: The input and VGG16’s top five
                   classes. Middle: The adversarial image, where the pixel values are in the range of about
                   [–2, 2], but shown here scaled to the range [0, 255] so they can be seen. Right: The result
                   of adding the image and the original (unscaled) adversary together, and the new top
                   five classes.

                        In the middle of Figure 17-24 we show an image computed by an algo-
                   rithm designed to find adversaries. All of the values in this image are about
                   in the range [–2, 2], but for this figure, we scaled the values to the range
                   [0, 255] so they’d be easier to see. In the top right of Figure 17-23 we show
                   the result of adding the tiger and the adversary, so each of the original tiger’s
                   pixels is changed by a value within the range [–2, 2]. To our eyes, the tiger
                   seems unchanged. Even the thin whiskers look the same. Below that image
                   are VGG16’s top five predictions for this new image. The system comes up
                   with completely different predictions for the image, none of which come
                   anywhere close to the correct class. Except for the low-probability class of
                   brain coral, the system doesn’t even think this image is an animal.
                        The perturbation image in Figure 17-24 may look random to our eyes,
                   but it’s not. This picture was specifically computed to throw off VGG16’s
                   prediction for the image of the tiger.
                        There are many different ways to compute adversarial images (Rauber,
                   Brendel, and Bethge 2018). The range of values in the perturbations these

492   Chapter 17
      methods create for a given image can vary considerably, so to find the small-
      est perturbation, it’s often worth trying a few different methods, also called
      attacks. We can compute adversaries to achieve different goals (Rauber and
      Brendel 2017b). For example, we can ask for a perturbation that simply
      causes the input to be misclassified. Another option asks for a perturbation
      that causes the input to be classified as a specific, desired class. To make
      Figure 17-24, we used an algorithm that is designed to make the classifier’s
      top seven predictions much more unlikely. That is, it takes in the starting
      image and the top seven predictions from the classifier and produces an
      adversary. When we add the adversary to the input and hand that to the
      classifier, none of its new top seven predictions contain any of the previous
      top seven predictions.
           We have to carefully construct adversarial perturbations, which sug-
      gests that they’re exploiting something subtle in our convnets.
           We may find a way to build convnets that resist these attacks, but con-
      volutional networks may be inherently vulnerable to these subtle image
      manipulations (Gilmer et al. 2018). The existence of adversaries suggests
      that convnets still hold surprises for us, and they shouldn’t be considered
      foolproof. There’s more to be learned about what’s going on inside of con-
      volutional networks.


Summary
      In this chapter we looked at a couple of real convnets: a small one for clas-
      sifying handwritten MNIST digits and the larger VGG16 network for clas-
      sifying photos. Though our MNIST network was quite small, it was able to
      classify digits with about 99 percent accuracy.
           We looked at the structure of VGG16, and then two different types of
      visualizations of its filters. We saw that the filters in this network start by
      looking for simple structures like edges and build up to complex and beau-
      tiful organic patterns.
           Finally, we saw that convolutional networks used as image classifiers are
      susceptible to being fooled by adjusting the pixel values by tiny amounts
      that are imperceptible to a human observer.
           In the next chapter we’ll look at how to build networks that figure out
      how to compress an input into a much smaller representation and then
      expand that again to produce something close to the original.




                                                                  Convnets in Practice   493
