=== p355 (ch13 init) ===
                                                                                    Outputs




                                                           Outputs
Inputs




                                                                                         Inputs

                             (a)                                                            (b)
Figure 13-9: Two neural networks drawn as graphs. Data flows from node to node along the edges, following
the arrows. When the edges are not labeled with an arrow, data usually flows left-to-right or bottom-to-top.
(a) Mostly left-to-right flow. (b) Mostly bottom-to-top flow.

                         We say that a node near the inputs in Figure 13-9(a) is before a node
                    nearer to the outputs, which comes after it. In Figure 13-9(b), we’d say a
                    node near the inputs is below a node near the outputs, which is above it.
                    Sometimes this below/above language is used even when the graph is
                    drawn left to right, which can be confusing. It can help to think of below as
                    “closer to the inputs,” and above as “closer to the outputs.”
                         We also sometimes say that if data flows from one node to another
                    (let’s say it flows from A to B), then node A is an ancestor or parent of B, and
                    node B is a descendant or child of A.
                         A common rule in neural networks is that there are no loops. This
                    means that data coming out of a node can never make its way back into that
                    same node, no matter how circuitous a path it follows. The formal name for
                    this kind of graph is a directed acyclic graph (or DAG, pronounced to rhyme
                    with “drag”). The word directed here means that the edges have arrows
                    (which may only be implied, as we mentioned earlier). The word acyclic
                    means there are no cycles, or loops. As always, there are exceptions to the
                    rules, but they’re rare. We’ll see one such exception when we discuss recur-
                    rent neural networks (RNNs) in Chapter 19.
                         DAGs are popular in many fields, including machine learning, because
                    they are significantly easier to understand, analyze, and design than
                    arbitrary graphs that have loops. Including loops can introduce feedback,
                    where a node’s output is returned to its input. Anyone who’s moved a live



324    Chapter 13
         microphone too close to a speaker is familiar with how quickly feedback
         can grow out of control. The acyclic nature of a DAG naturally avoids the
         feedback problem, which saves us from dealing with this complex issue.
              Recall that a graph or network in which data only flows forward from
         inputs to outputs is called feed-forward. In Chapter 14, we’ll see that a key step
         in training neural networks involves temporarily flipping the arrows around,
         sending a particular type of information from the output nodes back to the
         input nodes. Although the normal flow of data is still feed-forward, when we
         push data through it backward, generally we call that a feed-backward, back-
         ward-flow, or reverse-feed algorithm. We reserve the word feedback for situations
         in which a loop in the graph can enable a node to receive its own output as
         input. As we’ve said, we generally avoid feedback in neural networks.
              Interpreting graphs like those in Figure 13-9 usually means picturing
         the information as it flows along the edges, from one node to the next. But
         this picture only makes sense if we make some conventional assumptions.
         Let’s look at those now.
              Though we often use the word flow in various forms when referring to
         how data moves through the graph, this isn’t like the flow of water through
         pipes. Water flowing through pipes is a continuous process: new molecules
         of water flow through the pipes at every moment. The graphs we work with
         (and the neural networks they represent) are discrete: information arrives
         one chunk at a time, like text messages.
              Recall from Figure 13-5 that we can draw a neural network by placing
         a weight on each edge (rather than inside a neuron). We call this style of
         the network a weighted graph. As we saw in Figure 13-6, we rarely draw the
         weights explicitly, but they are implied. It is always the case that in any neu-
         ral network graph, even if no weights are explicitly shown, we are to under-
         stand that a unique weight is on each edge and as a value moves from one
         neuron to another along that edge that value is multiplied by the weight.


Initializing the Weights
         Teaching a neural network involves gradually improving the weights. The
         process begins when we assign initial values to the weights. How should we
         pick these starting values? It turns out that, in practice, how we initialize
         the weights can have a big effect on how quickly our network learns.
              Researchers have developed theories for good ways to pick the ini-
         tial values for the weights, and the various algorithms that have proved
         most useful are each named after the lead authors on the publications
         that describe them. The LeCun Uniform, Glorot Uniform (or Xavier Uniform),
         and He Uniform algorithms are all based on selecting initial values from a
         uniform distribution (LeCun et al. 1998; Glorot and Bengio 2010; He et
         al. 2015). It probably won’t be much of a surprise that the similarly named
         LeCun Normal, Glorot Normal (or Xavier Normal), and He Normal initialization
         methods draw their values from a normal distribution.




                                                                         Neural Networks   325
=== p504-506 (ch17 MNIST convnet dropout) ===
                           We will use a simple convnet designed for this job that is included
                       with the Keras machine learning library (Chollet 2017). Figure 17-1 shows
                       the architecture in our schematic form and in the traditional box-and-
                       label form.


28 x 28 x 1                                                                                                  10

                    32 x (3x3)    64 x (3x3)       2 x2    0.25           128        0.25      10
                      ReLU          ReLU                                 ReLU                softmax




                      Conv 2D          Conv 2D
                                                          MaxPool      Dropout
28 x 28 x 1          32 x (3x3)       64 x (3x3)
                                                            2x2         0.25
                       ReLU             ReLU




                                                             Dense         Dropout          Dense 10
                                               Flatten                                                       10
                                                            128 ReLU        0.25             softmax

Figure 17-1: A convnet for classifying MNIST digits. The input images are 28 by 28 by 1 channel. Two con-
volution layers are followed by pooling, dropout, and flatten, then a dense (or fully connected) layer, another
dropout, and a final dense layer with 10 outputs followed by softmax. Top: Our schematic version. Bottom:
Traditional box-and-label form.

                            The input to the net is the MNIST image, provided as a 3D tensor of
                       shape 28 by 28 by 1 (the 1 refers to the single grayscale channel). Though
                       there are two fully connected layers at the end, and various helper layers
                       (such as dropout, flatten, and pooling), we still refer to this as a convolu-
                       tional network, or convnet, because the convolution layers dominate the
                       classification work. The first convolution layer runs 32 filters, each of size 3
                       by 3, over the input. Each filter’s output is run through a ReLU activation
                       function before it leaves the layer.
                            By not specifying a stride, the filters will move by one element in each
                       direction. We’re also not applying any padding. As we saw in Figure 16-10,
                       this means that we lose a ring of elements after each convolution. That’s
                       okay in this case because all MNIST images are supposed to have a border
                       of four black pixels around the digit (not all images actually have this bor-
                       der, but most do).
                            The first layer’s input tensor is 28 by 28 by 1, so each filter in the first
                       convolution layer is one channel deep. Because we have 32 filters, we don’t
                       have any padding on the input, and the filters have a 3 by 3 footprint,
                       the output of the first convolution layer is 26 by 26 by 32. The second




474    Chapter 17
convolution layer contains 64 filters with 3 by 3 footprints. The system
knows that the input has 32 channels (because the previous layer had 32
filters), so each filter is created as a tensor of shape 3 by 3 by 32. Because
we’re still not using padding, we again lose a ring around the outside of the
input, producing an output tensor that’s 24 by 24 by 64.
     We could have used striding to reduce the size of the output, but here
we use an explicit max pooling layer with blocks of size 2 by 2. That means
for every nonoverlapping 2 by 2 block in the input, the layer outputs just
one value containing the largest value in the block. Thus, the output of this
layer is a tensor of size 12 by 12 by 64 (the pooling doesn’t change the num-
ber of channels).
     Next, we come to a dropout layer, represented by a diagonal slash.
As we saw in Chapter 15, the dropout layer itself doesn’t actually do any
processing. Instead, it instructs the system to apply dropout to the near-
est preceding layer that contains neurons. The nearest layer preceding
the dropout is pooling, but that has no neurons. As we continue to work
backward, we find a convolution layer, which does have neurons. During
training, the dropout algorithm is applied to this convolution layer (recall
that dropout is only applied during training, and is otherwise ignored).
Before each epoch of training, one-quarter of the neurons in this convo-
lution layer are temporarily disabled. This should help hold off overfit-
ting. By convention, we usually treat dropout as a layer, even though it
does no computation. Note that since the dropout layer looks backward
for the nearest layer with neurons, we could have placed it to the left of
the pooling layer and nothing about the network would have changed. By
convention, when we pool after convolution, we usually place those two
layers together.
     Now we leave the convolutional part of the network and prepare the
values for output. We typically find these steps, or something like them, at
the end of classification convnets. The output of the second convolution
layer is a 3D tensor, but we want to feed that into a fully connected layer,
which expects a list (or 1D tensor). A flatten layer, shown as two parallel
lines, takes an input tensor of any number of dimensions and reorganizes
it into a 1D tensor by placing all the elements together end-to-end. The list
is made up starting with the first row in the tensor. We take the first ele-
ment, and place its 64 values at the head of our list. Then we move to the
second element, and place its 64 values at the end of the list. We continue
doing this for every element in the row, and then we do it for the next row,
and so on. Figure 17-2 shows the process. None of the values in the tensor
are lost in this rearrangement.




                                                           Convnets in Practice   475
                   Figure 17-2: The action of a flatten layer. Top: The input tensor. Middle: Turning each
                   channel into a list. Bottom: Placing the lists one after the other to make one large list.

                       Returning to Figure 17-1, the flatten layer produces a list of 12 × 12 ×
                   64 = 9,216 numbers. That list goes into a fully connected, or dense, layer
                   of 128 neurons. That layer gets affected by dropout, where a quarter of the
                   neurons are temporarily disconnected at the start of each batch during
                   training.
                       The 128 outputs of this layer go into a final dense layer with 10 neu-
                   rons. The 10 outputs of this layer go into a softmax step so that they’re con-
                   verted to probabilities. The 10 numbers that come out of this last layer give
                   us the network’s prediction of the probability that the input image belongs
                   to each of the 10 possible classes, corresponding to the digits 0 through 9.
                       We trained this network for 12 epochs using the standard MNIST train-
                   ing data. Its accuracy on the training and validation data sets is shown in
                   Figure 17-3.
                       The curves show we’ve achieved about 99 percent accuracy on both the
                   training and validation data sets. Since the curves aren’t diverging, we’ve
                   successfully avoided overfitting.




476   Chapter 17
=== p582-584 (ch19 vanishing/exploding) ===
                   Recurrent Cells in Action
                   Let’s see how a recurrent cell might predict the next word of a five-word
                   sequence. We can see the inputs and possible outputs with an unrolled dia-
                   gram, shown in Figure 19-13.

                         swam        night       best       party       times




                            it        was         the        best         of

                   Figure 19-13: A recurrent cell predicting words. The diagram is in unrolled form.
                   Predictions come out of the top of the cell, whereas state is indicated by the open
                   horizontal arrow.

                         We begin with a cell whose hidden state has been initialized to some-
                   thing generic like all zeros, representing that nothing has been learned
                   yet. That’s the open circle at the far left. The first word, it, arrives. The cell
                   considers the input and its hidden state, and predicts the next word, swam.
                   The cell is telling us that the sentence that begins with it is most likely to
                   continue with the word swam, but we ignore this because we only care about
                   the prediction after the fifth word.
                         Now comes the interesting part. Using the information it learned dur-
                   ing training, the RNN updates its hidden state to contain some representa-
                   tion of the fact that it received the word it as input, and produced swam as
                   output.
                         Now comes the second word from the text, was. Again, the cell consults
                   its hidden state and the input, and produces a new output prediction. Here
                   it’s night, completing the phrase it was night. The cell updates its hidden state
                   to remember receiving it and then was and then predicting night. Again, we
                   ignore the prediction of night.
                         This goes on until we provide the fifth word, of. If we’re near the start
                   of training, the system might produce something like jellyfish, complet-
                   ing the sentence it was the best of jellyfish. But after enough training on the
                   original text, the networks inside the recurrent cell will have learned how
                   to represent the consecutive words of the phrase it was the best of inside the
                   hidden state in such a way that the word times has a high probability.

                   Training a Recurrent Neural Network
                   Suppose that we’re at the start of training the recurrent cell in Figure 19-13.
                   We give it the five words of input, and then compute an error by comparing
                   the cell’s final prediction with the next word from the text. If the prediction
                   doesn’t match the text, we run backprop and then optimization as usual.
                   Looking at the diagram, we start by finding the gradients in the rightmost
                   cell in the diagram, then we propagate the gradients to the preceding cell


552   Chapter 19
to its left, then propagate the gradients again to the cell preceding that,
and so on. It’s important to apply backprop in sequence because these are
sequential steps of processing.
     But we can’t really apply optimization to each box in Figure 19-13
because these are all the same cell! To the system, it looks like just one
instance of Figure 19-11 sitting on a layer of its own, rather than some
unrolled list of repeated uses of the same cell. Somehow we have to apply
backprop to the same layer repeatedly, which can create a confusing mess
of bookkeeping. To handle this, we use a special variant of backpropaga-
tion, called backpropagation through time, or BPTT. It handles these details so
that we can interpret Figure 19-13 literally for the purposes of training.
     BPTT allows us to train a recurrent cell efficiently, but it doesn’t solve
the training problem completely. Suppose that while using BPTT, we com-
pute a gradient for a particular weight in the rightmost cell in Figure 19-13.
Then as we propagate the gradient left, we find that the gradient for that
same weight in the previous cell is smaller. This means that as we push the
gradient to the left, through the same cell over and over, the same process
will repeat and the gradient will get smaller and smaller. If the gradient
gets 60 percent smaller each time, then after just eight cells, it is down to
less than a thousandth of its original size. All it takes for this process to get
started is for a gradient to become smaller as we move backward, which is
common. Then it inevitably gets smaller by the same percentage on every
step backward.
     This is very bad news. Recall that when a gradient becomes very small,
learning slows down, and if a gradient becomes zero, learning stops entirely.
This is not only bad for the recurrent cell, which stops learning, but for
neurons on the layers that precede it, because they lose the opportunity to
improve, too. The whole learning process can grind to a halt long before
we’ve reached the network’s smallest possible error.
     This phenomenon is called the vanishing gradient problem (Hochreiter
et al. 2001; Pascanu, Mikolov, and Bengio 2013). A similar problem comes
up if the gradient gets larger every time we step backward through the
unrolled diagram. After the same eight steps, a gradient that grows by 60
percent on each step is almost 43 times larger by the time it reaches the first
cell. This is called the exploding gradient problem (R2RT 2016). These are
serious problems that can prevent a network from learning.

Long Short-Term Memory and Gated Recurrent Networks
We can avoid both vanishing and exploding gradients with a fancier recur-
rent cell, called a long short-term memory, or LSTM. The name can be confus-
ing, but it refers to the fact that the internal state changes frequently, so
it can be considered a short-term memory. But sometimes we can choose
to keep some information in the state for a long time. It might make more
sense to think of this as a selectively persistent short-term memory. A block dia-
gram of an LSTM is shown in Figure 19-14.




                                                          Recurrent Neural Networks   553
                                          State



                                                                          Select             Output
                                                                         network


                      Forget                 Remember
                     network                  network



Input


Figure 19-14: A block diagram of a long short-term memory, or LSTM

                          The LSTM uses three internal neural networks. The first is used to
                     remove (or forget) information from the state that is no longer needed. The
                     second inserts new information the cell wants to remember. The third net-
                     work presents a version of the internal state as the cell’s output.
                          The convention is that “forgetting” a number simply means moving it
                     toward zero, and remembering a new number means adding it in to the
                     appropriate location in the state memory.
                          The LSTM doesn’t require repeated copies of itself, like the basic recur-
                     rent cell of Figure 19-11, so it avoids the problems of vanishing and explod-
                     ing gradients. We can place this LSTM cell on a layer and train the neural
                     networks inside it using normal backprop and optimization. A practical
                     implementation has many details that we’ve skipped over here, but they fol-
                     low this general flow (Hochreiter et al. 2001; Olah 2015).
                          The LSTM has proven to be such a good way to implement a recurrent
                     cell that when people speak of “an RNN” they often mean a network that
                     uses the LSTM in particular. A popular variation of the LSTM is the gated
                     recurrent unit, or GRU. It’s not uncommon to try out both the LSTM and
                     GRU in a network to see which performs better on a specific task.


      Using Recurrent Neural Networks
                     It’s easy to build a network with a recurrent cell (whether it’s an LSTM, a
                     GRU, or something else). We just place a recurrent layer in our network and
                     train as usual.

                     Working with Sunspot Data
                     Let’s demonstrate this with our sunspot data. We’ll train a network with
                     a single recurrent layer holding a tiny LSTM with just three values in its

554     Chapter 19
=== p285 (ch10 data augmentation) ===
                   only two numbers. This means our algorithms consume less memory and
                   run more quickly.




Figure 10-39: Our starting six images (top), and the reconstructed images from Figure 10-35c (bottom)

                      We skipped a step in this example: normally when we use PCA, we stan-
                   dardize all the images first. That’s included in our next example.

                   PCA for Real Images
                   The images in the last section were contrived for simplicity. Now we’ll apply
                   PCA to real pictures.
                        Let’s begin with the six pictures of huskies shown in Figure 10-40. To
                   make our processing easier to see, these images are only 45 × 64 pixels.
                   These were aligned by hand so that the eyes and nose are in about the
                   same location in each image. This way each pixel in each image has a good
                   chance of representing the same part of a dog as the corresponding pixel in
                   the other images. For instance, a pixel just below the center is likely to part
                   of a nose, one near the upper corners is likely to be an ear, and so on.




                   Figure 10-40: Our starting set of huskies

                       A database of six dogs isn’t a lot of training data, so let’s enlarge our
                   database using the idea of data augmentation, a common strategy for amplify-
                   ing or enlarging a dataset. In this case, let’s run through our set of six images
                   in random order over and over. Each time through, we’ll pick an image,
                   make a copy, randomly shift it horizontally and vertically up to 10 percent
                   on each axis, rotate it up to five degrees clockwise or counterclockwise, and
                   maybe flip it left to right. Then we append that transformed image to our
                   training set. Figure 10-41 shows the results of the first two passes through


                                                                                         Data Preparation   255
                   our six dogs. We used this technique of creating variations to build a train-
                   ing set of 4,000 dog images.




                   Figure 10-41: Each row shows a set of new images created by shifting, rotating, and per-
                   haps horizontally flipping each of our input images.

                      Since we’d like to run PCA on these images, our first step is to stan-
                   dardize them. This means we analyze the same pixel in each of our 4,000
                   images and adjust the collection to have zero mean and unit variance (Turk
                   and Pentland 1991). The standardized versions of our first six generated
                   dogs are shown in Figure 10-42.




                   Figure 10-42: Our first six huskies after standardization

                       Since 12 images fit nicely into a figure, let’s begin by arbitrarily ask-
                   ing PCA to find the 12 images that, when added together with appropri-
                   ate weights, best reconstruct the input images. Each of the projections (or
                   components) found by PCA is technically known as an eigenvector, from
                   the German eigen meaning “own” (or roughly “self”), and vector from the
                   mathematical name for this kind of object. When we create eigenvectors of
                   particular types of things, it’s common to create a playful name by combin-
                   ing the prefix eigen with the object we’re processing. Hence, Figure 10-43
                   shows our 12 eigendogs.




256   Chapter 10
