                             4
     NEURAL NETWORKS: BRAIN-LIKE AI




Connectionism seeks to provide a substrate from which
intelligence might emerge. Today, connectionism means
neural networks, with neural being a nod to biological
neurons. Despite the name, however, the relationship
between the two is superﬁcial. Biological neurons and
artiﬁcial neurons may possess a similar conﬁguration, but
they operate in an entirely different manner.
   Biological neurons accept input on their dendrites, and
when a sufﬁcient number of inputs are active they “ﬁre” to
produce a short-lived voltage spike on their axons. In other
words, biological neurons are off until they’re on. Some
800 million years of animal evolution have made the
process considerably more complex, but that’s the essence.
   The artiﬁcial neurons of a neural network likewise
possess inputs and outputs, but instead of ﬁring, the
neurons are mathematical functions with continuous
behavior. Some models spike like biological neurons, but
we ignore them in this book. The neural networks
powering the AI revolution operate continuously.
   Think of a biological neuron like a light switch. It’s off
until there is a reason (sufﬁcient input) to turn it on. The
biological neuron doesn’t turn on and stay on but ﬂashes on
and off, like ﬂicking the switch. An artiﬁcial neuron is akin
to a light with a dimmer switch. Turn the switch a tiny
amount to produce a small amount of light; turn the switch
further, and the light’s brightness changes proportionally.
This analogy isn’t accurate in all cases, but it conveys the
essential notion that artiﬁcial neurons are not all or
nothing. Instead, they produce output in proportion to
their input according to some function. The fog will lift as
we work through the chapter, so don’t worry if this makes
little sense at present.
                                   ****
   Figure 4-1 is the most critical ﬁgure in the book. It’s also
one of the simplest, as is to be expected if the connectionist
approach is on the right track. If we understand what
Figure 4-1 represents and how it operates, we have the core
understanding necessary to make sense of modern AI.




Figure 4-1: The humble (artiﬁcial) neuron
   Figure 4-1 contains three squares, a circle, ﬁve arrows,
and labels like “x0” and “Output.” Let’s examine each in
turn, beginning with the squares on the left.
   Standard practice presents neural networks with the
inputs on the left and data ﬂow to the right. In Figure 4-1,
the three squares labeled x0, x1, and x2 are the inputs to the
neuron. They are the three features of a feature vector,
what we want the neuron to process to give us an output
leading to a class label.
    The circle is labeled h, a standard notation for the
activation function. The activation function’s job is to accept
input to the neuron and produce an output value, the arrow
heading off to the right in Figure 4-1.
   The three input squares are connected to the circle (the
node) by arrows, one from each input square. The arrows’
labels—w0, w1, and w2—are the weights. Every input to the
neuron has an associated weight. The lone b linked to the
circle by an arrow is the bias. It’s a number, as are the
weights, the input xs, and the output. For this neuron,
three numbers come in, and one number goes out.
   The neuron operates like this:

  1. Multiply every input value, x0, x1, and x2, by its
     associated weight, w0, w1, and w2.
  2. Add all the products from step 1 together along with
     the bias value, b. This produces a single number.
  3. Give the single number to h, the activation function,
     to produce the output, also a single number.

That’s all a neuron does: it multiplies its inputs by the
weights, sums the products, adds the bias value, and passes
that total to the activation function to produce the output.
   Virtually all the fantastic accomplishments of modern AI
are due to this primitive construct. String enough of these
together in the correct conﬁguration, and you have a model
that can learn to identify dog breeds, drive a car, or
translate from French to English. Well, you do if you have
the magic weight and bias values, which training gives us.
These values are so important to neural networks that one
company has adopted “Weights & Biases” as its name; see
https://www.wandb.ai.
    We have choices for the activation function, but in
modern networks it’s most often the rectiﬁed linear unit
(ReLU) mentioned in Chapter 2. The ReLU is a question:
is the input (the sum of the inputs multiplied by the
weights plus the bias) less than zero? If so, the output is
zero; otherwise, it’s whatever the input is.
   Can something as straightforward as a lone neuron be
useful? It can. As an experiment, I trained the neuron in
Figure 4-1 using three features from the iris ﬂower dataset
from Chapter 1 as input. Recall, this dataset contains
measurements of the parts of three different species of iris.
After training, I tested the neuron with an unused test set
that had 30 feature vectors. The neuron correctly classiﬁed
28, for an accuracy of 93 percent.
   I trained the neuron by searching for a set of three
weights and a bias value producing an output that, when
rounded to the nearest whole number, matched the class
label for an iris ﬂower—either 0, 1, or 2. This is not the
standard way to train a neural network, but it works for
something as modest as a single neuron. We’ll discuss
standard network training later in the chapter.
  A single neuron can learn, but complex inputs bafﬂe it.
Complex inputs imply we need a more complex model.
Let’s give our single neuron some friends.
    Convention arranges neurons in layers, with the outputs
from the previous layer the inputs to the following layer.
Consider Figure 4-2, which shows networks with two,
three, and eight nodes in the layer after the input.
Arranging the network in layers simpliﬁes the
implementation in code and facilitates the standard training
procedure. That said, there is no requirement to use layers
if an alternative way to train the model can be found.
Figure 4-2: Two-, three-, and eight-node networks
   Let’s begin with the two-node network at the upper left.
The three inputs (squares) are there, but this time there are
two circles in the middle layer and a single circle on the
right. The inputs are fully connected to the two nodes in
the middle layer, meaning a line connects each input square
to each middle layer node. The middle layer outputs are
connected to a single node on the far right, from which the
network’s output comes.
   The middle layers of a neural network between the
input on the left and the output on the right are known as
hidden layers. For example, the networks of Figure 4-2 each
have one hidden layer with 2, 3, and 8 nodes, respectively.
    A network with this conﬁguration is suitable for a binary
classiﬁcation task, class 0 versus class 1, where the output is
a single number representing the model’s belief that the
input is a member of class 1. Therefore, the rightmost node
uses a different activation function known as a sigmoid (also
called a logistic). The sigmoid produces an output between
0 and 1. This is also the range used to represent a
probability, so many people refer to the output of a node
with a sigmoid activation function as a probability. This is
not generally accurate, but we can live with the sloppiness.
The nodes of the hidden layer all use ReLU activation
functions.
   How many weights and biases must we learn to
implement the two-node network in Figure 4-2? We need
one weight for each line (except the output arrow) and one
bias value for each node. Therefore, we need eight weights
and three bias values. For the model at the lower left, we
need 12 weights and 4 biases. Finally, for the 8-node
model, we need to learn 32 weights and 9 bias values. As
the number of nodes in a layer increases, the number of
weights increases even faster. This fact alone restrained
neural networks for years, as potentially useful models were
too big for a single computer’s memory. Of course, model
size is relative. OpenAI’s GPT-3 has over 175 billion
weights, and while they aren’t talking about how large
GPT-4 is, rumor puts it at 1.7 trillion weights.
   We need a two-class dataset to explore the models in
Figure 4-2. The dataset we’ll use is a classic one that
attempts to distinguish between two cultivars of grapes
used to make wine in a particular region of Italy.
Unfortunately, the wines represented by the dataset are, it
seems, no longer known. (That’s how old the dataset is.)
However, we know that models don’t care about the labels
—they use numbers—so we’ll use 0 and 1 as the labels.
   We need three features, x0, x1, and x2. The features we’ll
use are alcohol content in percent, malic acid, and total
phenols. The goal is to train the models in Figure 4-2 to
see how well each performs when identifying an unknown
wine given measurements of the three features.
   I trained the two-neuron model using a training set of
104 samples and a test set of 26 samples. This means I used
104 triplets of measured alcohol content, malic acid level,
and total phenols, knowing the proper output label, class 0
or class 1. The training set conditioned the two-neuron
model to give values to all eight weights and three biases. I
promise we will discuss how training works, but for now,
assume it happens so we can explore how neural networks
behave. The trained model achieved an accuracy on the test
set of 81 percent, meaning it was right better than 8 times
out of 10. That’s not too bad for such a small model and
training set.
   Figure 4-3 presents the trained two-neuron model. I
added the weights to the links and the biases to the nodes
so you can see them. I think it’s worth looking at the
numbers at least once, and it’s best to do that with a simple
model.




Figure 4-3: The two-neuron model trained on the wine dataset
   Let’s use the model with two test samples to understand
the process. The two test samples consist of three numbers
each, the values of the features, (x0, x1, x2):

    Sample 1         (–0.7359, 0.9795, –0.1333)

    Sample 2         ( 0.0967, –1.2138, –1.0500)

  You may have a question at this point. I said the features
were alcohol content in percent, malic acid level, and total
phenols. While I have no idea what the units are for
measuring malic acid or total phenols, a percent is a
percent, so why is x0 for the ﬁrst sample a small negative
number? We can’t have a negative percentage of alcohol.
    The answer has to do with preprocessing. Raw data, like
the percent alcohol, is seldom used with machine learning
models as is. Instead, each feature is adjusted by subtracting
the average value of the feature over the training set and
dividing that result by a measure of how scattered the data
is around the average value (the standard deviation). The
original alcohol content was 12.29 percent, a reasonable
value for wine, but after scaling, it became –0.7359.
   Let’s classify sample 1 using the learned weights and
biases in Figure 4-3. The input to the top neuron is each
feature multiplied by the weight on the line connecting that
feature to the neuron, then summed with the bias value.
The ﬁrst feature gives us 0.4716 × –0.7359, the second
0.0399 × 0.9795, and the third –0.3902 × –0.1333, with bias
value 0.0532. Adding all of these together gives – 0.2028.
This is the number passed to the activation function, a
ReLU. Since it is negative, the ReLU returns 0, meaning
the output from the top node is 0. Repeating the
calculation for the bottom node gives 0.1720 as the input to
the ReLU. That’s a positive number, so the ReLU returns
0.1720 as the output.
   The outputs of the two nodes in the middle layer are
now used as the inputs to the ﬁnal node on the right. As
before, we multiply the outputs by the weights, add them
along with the bias value, and pass that to the activation
function. In this case, the activation function is not a ReLU
but a sigmoid.
   The top node’s output is 0, and the bottom’s output is
0.1720. Multiplying these by their respective weights,
summing, and adding the bias value of 2.2277 gives us
1.9502 as the argument to the sigmoid activation function,
producing 0.8755 as the network’s output for the ﬁrst input
sample.
   How should we interpret this output? Here’s where we
learn an important aspect of neural networks:
     Neural networks don’t tell us the actual class label for the input, but
     only their conﬁdence in one label relative to another.

   Binary models output a conﬁdence value that we’re
interpreting as the probability of the input belonging to
class 1. Probabilities are numbers between 0 (no chance)
and 1 (absolutely assured). Humans are generally more
comfortable with percentages, which we get by multiplying
the probability by 100. Therefore, we can say that the
network is a little more than 87 percent conﬁdent that this
input represents an instance of class 1.
   In practice, we use a threshold—a cutoff value—to
decide which label to assign. The most common approach
for binary models is a threshold of 50 percent. If the output
exceeds 50 percent (probability 0.5), we assign the input to
class 1. This output is above 50 percent, so we assign “class
1” as the label. This sample is from class 1, meaning the
network’s assigned label is correct.
   We can repeat these calculations for the second input
sample, (0.0967, –1.2138, –1.0500). I’ll leave walking
through it to you as an exercise, but the network’s output
for sample 2 is 0.4883. In other words, the network’s
conﬁdence that this sample belongs to class 1 is 49 percent.
The cutoff is 50 percent, so we reject the class 1 label and
assign this input to class 0. The actual class is class 1, so, in
this instance, the network is wrong—it assigned a class 1
sample to class 0. Oops.
   Is this a useful model? The answer depends on the
context. We’re classifying wine by cultivar. If the model’s
output is wrong 20 percent of the time, which is one time
in ﬁve, is that acceptable? I suspect not, but there might be
other tasks where a model with this level of accuracy is
acceptable.
   Neural networks offer some control over how their
outputs are interpreted. For example, we might not use 50
percent as the cutoff. If we make it lower, say, 40 percent,
we’ll capture more class 1 samples, but at the expense of
mistakenly identifying more actual class 0 samples as class
1. In other words, we get to trade off one kind of error for
another.
    Let’s bring the other models in Figure 4-2 into the mix.
I trained all three models using the same training and test
sets used for Figure 4-3. I repeated the process 240 times
for each of the three models. Here are the average
accuracies:

   2-node        81.5 percent

   3-node        83.6 percent

   8-node        86.2 percent

   The model’s performance improves as the number of
nodes in the hidden layer increases. This makes intuitive
sense, as a more complex model (more nodes) implies the
ability to learn more complex associations hidden within
the training set.
    I suspect you now have a new question: why did I train
each model 240 times and report the average accuracy over
all 240 models? Here’s another critical thing to understand
about neural networks:
     Neural networks are randomly initialized, such that repeated
     training leads to differently performing models even when using
     the same training data.

   The phrase “randomly initialized” demands
clariﬁcation. Look again at Figure 4-3. The numbers
representing the weights and biases came from an iterative
process. This means that an initial set of weights and biases
are updated repeatedly, each time moving the network
toward a better and better approximation of whatever
function it is that links the input feature vectors and the
output labels. Approximating this function well is what we
want the network to do.
   Why not initialize all the weights to the same value?
The answer is that doing so forces the weights to learn
similar characteristics of the data, which is something we
don’t want, and in the end the model will perform poorly. If
we set all of the initial weights to zero, the model does not
learn at all.
   An initial set of values are necessary for the iterative
process to work. How should we pick the initial values?
That’s an important question, and the answer for our
current level of understanding is “at random,” meaning we
roll dice, in a sense, to get the initial value for each weight
and bias. The iterative process then reﬁnes these values to
arrive at the ﬁnal set in Figure 4-3.
   However, the iterative process doesn’t always end in the
same place. Pick a different random set of initial weights
and biases, and the network will converge to a different set
of ﬁnal values. For example, the network in Figure 4-3
achieved an accuracy of 81 percent, as mentioned
previously. Here are 10 more accuracies for the same
network trained and tested on the same data:
             89, 85, 73, 81, 81, 81, 81, 85, 85, 85
    The accuracies range from a high of 89 percent to a low
of 73 percent. All that changed between each training
session was the collection of initial weights and biases. This
is an often overlooked issue with neural networks.
Networks should be trained multiple times, if feasible, to
gather data on their effectiveness or, as with the 73 percent
version of the network, to understand that a bad set of
initial values was used purely by chance. I should also
mention that the wide variation in the accuracy of this
network is related to its being relatively small and
containing only a few weights and biases. Larger models
tend to be more consistent when trained repeatedly.
   We’ve already covered a lot of ground, so a recap is in
order:

    The fundamental unit of a neural network is the
    neuron, also called a node.
    Neurons multiply their inputs by weights, sum those
    products, add a bias value, and pass all of that to the
    activation function to produce an output value.
    Neural networks are collections of individual neurons,
    typically arranged in layers with the output of the
    current layer the input to the following layer.
    Training a neural network assigns values to the weights
    and biases by iteratively adjusting an initial, randomly
    selected set.
    Binary neural networks produce an output that
    roughly corresponds to the probability of the input
    belonging to class 1.

                            ****
   Now that we know what a neural network is and how it’s
used, we ﬁnally come to the crux of the matter: where do
the magic weights and biases come from in the ﬁrst place?
In Chapter 2, I brieﬂy mentioned that neural networks
improved in the 1980s thanks to two essential algorithms:
backpropagation and gradient descent. These are the
algorithms at the heart of neural network training.
    We discussed optimization, the process of ﬁnding the
best of something according to some criteria, in Chapter 3
in reference to support vector machines. Training a neural
network is also an optimization process, involving learning
the weights and biases that best ﬁt the training data. Care
must be taken, however, to make it more likely that the
learned weights and biases ﬁt general trends in the training
data rather than the details of the speciﬁc training data
itself. What I mean by that will become apparent as we
learn more about the training process.
   The general training algorithm is:
  1. Select the model’s architecture, including the number
     of hidden layers, nodes per layer, and activation
     function.
  2. Randomly but intelligently initialize all the weights
     and biases associated with the selected architecture.
  3. Run the training data, or a subset, through the model
     and calculate the average error. This is the forward pass.
  4. Use backpropagation to determine how much each
     weight and bias contributes to that error.
  5. Update the weights and biases according to the
     gradient descent algorithm. This and the previous step
     make up the backward pass.
  6. Repeat from step 3 until the network is considered
     “good enough.”

   These six steps include many important terms. It’s worth
our time to ensure that we have an idea of what each
means. In this chapter, architecture refers to the number of
layers, typically hidden layers, used by the network. We
have our input feature vector, and we can imagine each
hidden layer working collectively to accept an input vector
and produce an output vector, which then becomes the
input to the next layer, and so on. For binary classiﬁers, the
network’s output is a single node producing a value from 0
to 1. We’ll learn later in the book that this idea can be
extended to multiclass outputs.
    The algorithm indicates that training is an iterative
process that repeats many times. Iterative processes have a
starting point. If you want to walk from point A to point B,
place one foot in front of the other. That’s the iterative
part. Point A is the starting point. For a neural network,
the architecture implies a set of weights and biases. The
initial values assigned to those weights and biases are akin
to point A, with training akin to placing one foot in front of
the other.
   The algorithm uses the phrase “average error.” What
error? Here’s where a new concept enters the picture.
Intuitively, we can see that simply picking some initial
values for the weights and biases is not likely to lead to a
network able to classify the training data accurately.
Remember, we know the inputs and the expected outputs
for the training data.
    Say we push training sample 1 through the network to
give us an output value, perhaps 0.44. If we know that
sample 1 belongs to class 1, the error made by the network
is the difference between the expected output and the
actual output. Here, that’s 1 – 0.44, or 0.56. A good model
might instead have produced an output of 0.97 for this
sample, giving an error of only 0.03. The smaller the error,
the better the model is at classifying the sample. If we push
all the training data through the network, or a
representative subset of it, we can calculate the error for
each training sample and ﬁnd the average over the entire
training set. That’s the measure used by the (to be
described) backpropagation and gradient descent
algorithms to update the weights and biases.
   Finally, the training algorithm says to push data through
the network, get an error, update the weights and biases,
and repeat until the network is “good enough.” In a way,
good enough is when the error, also called the loss, is as
close to zero as possible. If the network produces 0 as the
output for all class 0 samples and 1 as the output for all
class 1 samples, then it performs perfectly on the training
data, and the error will be zero. That’s certainly good
enough, but we must be careful. Sometimes when that
happens the network is overﬁtting, meaning it’s learned all
the details of the training data without actually learning the
general trends of the data that will allow it to perform well
when used with unknown inputs in the wild.
   In practice, overﬁtting is addressed in several ways, the
best of which is acquiring more training data. We use the
training data as a stand-in for all the possible data that
could be produced by whatever process we are trying to
model. Therefore, more training data means a better
representation of that data collection. It’s the interpolate
versus extrapolate issue we discussed in Chapter 1.
   However, getting more training data might not be
possible. Alternatives include tweaking the training
algorithm to introduce things that keep the network from
focusing on irrelevant details of the training data while
learning. One such technique you may hear mentioned is
weight decay, which penalizes the network if it makes the
weight values too large.
    Another common approach is data augmentation. Out of
training data? No worries, data augmentation will invent
some by slightly modifying the data you already have. Data
augmentation takes the existing training data and mutates it
to produce new data that might plausibly have been created
by the same process that made the actual training data. For
example, if the training sample is a picture of a dog, it will
still be a picture of a dog if you rotate it, shift it up a few
pixels, ﬂip it left to right, and so on. Each transformation
produces a new training sample. It might seem like
cheating, but in practice, data augmentation is a powerful
regularizer that keeps the network from overﬁtting during
training.
  Let’s return for a moment to initialization, as its
importance was not sufﬁciently appreciated for many years.
   At ﬁrst, weight initialization meant nothing more than
“pick a small random number” like 0.001 or –0.0056. That
worked much of the time. However, it didn’t work
consistently, and when it did work, the network’s behavior
wasn’t stellar.
   Shortly after the advent of deep learning, researchers
revisited the “small random value” idea in search of a more
principled approach to initialization. The fruit of those
efforts is the way neural networks are initialized to this day.
Three factors need to be considered: the form of the
activation function, the number of connections coming
from the layer below (fan-in), and the number of outputs to
the layer above (fan-out). Formulas were devised to use all
three factors to select the initial weights for each layer. Bias
values are usually initialized to zero. It isn’t difﬁcult to
demonstrate that networks so initialized perform better
than those initialized the old-fashioned way.
    We have two steps of the training algorithm yet to
discuss: backpropagation and gradient descent.
Backpropagation is often presented ﬁrst because its output
is necessary for gradient descent. However, I think it’s more
intuitive to understand what gradient descent is doing, then
ﬁll in the missing piece it needs with what backpropagation
provides. Despite the unfamiliar names, I am certain you
already understand the essence of both algorithms.
                              ****
   You’re standing in a vast, open grassland of rolling hills.
How did you get here? You strain your brain, but no
answer comes. Then, ﬁnally, you spy a small village to the
north, in the valley far below. Perhaps the people there can
give you some answers. But what’s the best way to get
there?
   You want to go north and down, in general, but you
must also respect the contour of the land. You always want
to move from a higher to a lower position. You can’t go due
north because a large hill is in your way. You could head
northeast; the terrain is ﬂatter there, but going that way
will make your journey a long one, as the land drops slowly.
So, you decide to head northwest, as that moves you both
north and down more steeply than to the east. You take a
step to the northwest, then pause to reassess your position
to decide which direction to move in next.
   Repeating this two-stage process of examining your
current position to determine the direction that best moves
you both northward and downward, then taking a step in
that direction, is your best bet for reaching the village in
the valley. You may not make it; you might get stuck in a
small canyon out of which you can’t climb. But overall,
you’ll make progress toward your goal by consistently
moving in a direction that is north and down relative to
your current position.
   Following this process, known as gradient descent, lets us
adjust a neural network’s initial weights and biases to give
us ever better-performing models. In other words, gradient
descent trains the model.
   The three-dimensional world of the grassland
surrounding the village corresponds to the n-dimensional
world of the network, where n is the total number of
weights and biases whose values we are trying to learn.
Choosing a direction to head in from your current position
and then moving some distance in that direction is a
gradient descent step. Repeated gradient descent steps
move you closer and closer to the village.
    Gradient descent seeks the minimum position, the
village in the valley—but the minimum of what? For a
neural network, gradient descent aims to adjust the weights
and biases of the network to minimize the error over the
training set.
   The vast, open grassland of rolling hills represents the
error function, the average error over the training data
when using the weight and bias values corresponding to
your current position. This means that each position in the
grassland implies a complete set of network weights and
biases. The position of the village corresponds to the
smallest error the network can make on the training set.
The hope is that a model that has a small error on its
training set will make few errors on unknown inputs when
used in the wild. Gradient descent is the algorithm that
moves through the space of weights and biases to minimize
the error.
    Gradient descent is an optimization algorithm, again
telling us that training a neural network is an optimization
problem, a problem where we need to ﬁnd the best set of
something. While this is true, it is also true that training a
neural network is subtly different from other optimization
problems. As mentioned previously, we don’t necessarily
want the smallest possible error on the training data, but
rather the model that best generalizes to unknown inputs.
We want to avoid overﬁtting. I’ll demonstrate visually what
that means later in the chapter.
    Gradient descent moves through the landscape of the
error function. In everyday use, a gradient is a change in
something, like the steepness of a road or a color gradient
varying smoothly from one shade to another.
Mathematically, a gradient is the multidimensional analog
of the slope of a curve at a point. The steepest direction to
move is down the maximum gradient. The slope of a line at
a point on a curve is a helpful representation of the
gradient, so contemplating slopes is a worthy use of our
time.
    Figure 4-4 shows a curve with four lines touching it at
different points. The lines represent the slope at those
points. The slope indicates how quickly the value of the
function changes in the vicinity of the point. The steeper
the line, the faster the function’s value changes as you move
along the x-axis.
Figure 4-4: A curve with the slope at various points marked
   Line B marks the lowest point on the curve. This is the
global minimum and the point that an optimization
algorithm seeks to ﬁnd. Notice that the line touching this
point is entirely horizontal. Mathematically, this means that
the slope of line B is zero. This is true at the minima (and
maxima) of functions.
   The point touched by line B is the global minimum, but
there are three other minima in the plot. These are local
minima, points where the slope of the line touching those
points is also zero. Ideally, an optimization algorithm would
avoid these points, favoring the global minimum.
    Line A is steep and points toward the global minimum.
Therefore, if we were at the point on the curve touched by
line A, we could move quickly toward the global minimum
by taking steps in the indicated direction. Moreover, as the
slope is steep here, we can take reasonably large steps down
to the valley.
   Line C is also steep but heads toward one of the local
minima, the one just beyond 3 on the x-axis. A gradient
descent algorithm that only knows how to move down the
gradient will locate that local minimum and become stuck
there. The same applies to line D, which heads toward the
local minimum between 4 and 5 on the x-axis.
   What are the takeaways from Figure 4-4? First, gradient
descent moves down the gradient, or slope, from some
point. Here the curve is one- dimensional, so the point is a
speciﬁc value of x. Gradient descent uses the value of the
slope at that point to pick a direction and a step size
proportional to the steepness of the slope. A steep slope
means we can take a larger step to end up at a new x value
closer to a minimum. A shallow slope implies a smaller
step.
   For example, suppose we are initially at the point where
line A touches the curve. The slope is steep, so we take a
big step toward the global minimum. After the step, we
look at the slope again, but this time it’s the slope at the
new point on the x-axis. Using that slope, we take another
step, then another, and another until we get to a point
where the slope is essentially zero. That’s the minimum, so
we stop.
    The one-dimensional case is straightforward enough
because at each point there is only one slope, so there is
only one direction to go. However, recalling the vast, open
grassland, we know that from any point there are an inﬁnite
number of directions we might head in, many of which are
useful in that they move us northward and downward. One
of these directions, the direction of the maximum gradient,
is the steepest and moves us most quickly toward our
desired destination, and that’s the direction we step in.
Repeating the process, using the maximum gradient
direction each time, accomplishes in multiple dimensions
what we did in one dimension. To be precise, we step in the
direction opposite the maximum gradient because the
maximum gradient points away from the minimum, not
toward it.
   Figure 4-5 presents gradient descent in two dimensions.
The ﬁgure shows a contour plot. Imagine an open pit mine
with terraced levels: the lighter the shade, the deeper into
the mine, but also the ﬂatter the slope. That is, lighter
shades imply shallower slopes.




Figure 4-5: Gradient descent in two dimensions
   The ﬁgure shows the path taken by gradient descent for
three starting positions: the circle, the triangle, and the
square. Initially, the slopes are steep, so the step sizes are
big, but the slopes become shallow as the minimum is
approached, implying smaller steps. Eventually, gradient
descent reaches the minimum, regardless of the starting
point.
   We’ve discussed gradient descent in one and two
dimensions because we can visualize the process. We
understand now that we have always known the algorithm
and used it ourselves whenever we walk from a higher
elevation to a lower one. Honestly, this is all that training a
neural network does. The initial set of weights and biases is
nothing more than a single starting point in an n-
dimensional space. Gradient descent uses the maximum
gradient from that initial starting position to march toward
a minimum. Each new position in the n-dimensional space
is a new set of the n weights and biases generated from the
previous set based on the steepness of the gradient. When
the gradient gets very small, we claim victory and ﬁx the
weights and biases, believing the network to be trained.
   Gradient descent depends on slopes, on the value of the
gradient. But where do the gradients come from? Gradient
descent minimizes the loss function, or the error made by
the network. The error over the training set is a function of
each weight and bias value in the network. The gradient
represents how much each weight and bias contributes to
the overall error.
   For example, suppose we know how much weight 3
(whatever weight that labels) contributes to the network’s
error as measured by the mistakes the network makes on
the training set. In that case, we know the steepness of the
gradient should we change weight 3’s value, keeping all
other weights and biases the same. That steepness,
multiplied by a step size, gives us a value to subtract from
weight 3’s current value. By subtracting, we move in the
direction opposite to the maximum gradient. Repeating the
calculation for every weight and bias in the network takes a
step in the n-dimensional space. This is what gradient
descent does during training.
   Backpropagation is the algorithm that gives us the
steepness values per weight and bias. Backpropagation is an
application of a well-known rule from differential calculus,
the branch of mathematics telling us how one thing
changes as another changes. Speed is an example. Speed
indicates how distance changes with time. It’s even in how
we talk about speed: miles per hour or kilometers per hour.
Backpropagation gives us the “speed” representing how the
network’s error changes with a change in any weight or bias
value. Gradient descent uses these “speeds,” multiplied by a
scale factor known as the learning rate, to step to the next
position in the n-dimensional space represented by the n
weights and biases of the network.
   For example, the “big” network in Figure 4-2 has 32
weights and 9 biases; therefore, training that network with
gradient descent means moving through a 41-dimensional
space to ﬁnd the 41 weight and bias values giving us the
smallest error averaged over the training set.
   The algorithm is called “backpropagation” because it
calculates the “speed” values for each weight and bias,
beginning with the network’s output layer and then moving
backward, layer by layer, to the input layer. That is, it
moves backward through the network to propagate the
error from a layer to the previous layer.
   The take-home message is this:
     Gradient descent uses the gradient direction supplied by
     backpropagation to iteratively update the weights and biases to
     minimize the network’s error over the training set.

   And that, in a nutshell, is how neural networks are
trained.
                                   ****
   The ability to train a neural network with
backpropagation and gradient descent is a bit of a ﬂuke. It
shouldn’t work. Gradient descent with backpropagation is a
ﬁrst-order optimization approach. First-order optimization
works best with simple functions, and the error surfaces of
a neural network are anything but. However, Fortuna has
smiled upon us, and it does work, and rather well at that.
There is as yet no rigorous mathematical explanation
beyond the realization that the local minima of the error
function are all pretty much the same, meaning if you land
in one and can’t get out, that’s often just ﬁne.
  There is another empirical explanation, but to
understand that, we must learn more about the training
process. The six-step training algorithm I gave earlier in
the chapter talks about running the training set, or a subset
of it, through the network, and repeating until things are
“good enough.” Let me expand on the process implied by
these steps.
    Each pass of training data through the network, a
forward pass followed by a backward pass, results in a
gradient descent step as shown in Figure 4-5. If the training
set is small, all of it is used in the forward pass, meaning all
of it is used by gradient descent to decide where to step
next. A complete pass through the training data is called an
epoch; therefore, using all the training data in the forward
and backward passes results in one gradient descent step
per epoch.
   Modern machine learning datasets are often massive,
making it computationally infeasible to use all of the
training data for each gradient descent step. Instead, a
small, randomly selected subset of the data, known as a
minibatch, is passed through the network for the forward
and backward passes. Using minibatches dramatically
reduces the computational overhead during gradient
descent, resulting in many steps per epoch. Minibatches
also provide another beneﬁt that helps overcome the “this
approach to training shouldn’t work” issue.
   Suppose we had a mathematical function representing
the error made by the network. In that case, we could use
centuries-old calculus techniques to ﬁnd the exact form of
each weight and bias’s contribution to the error; gradient
descent would know the best direction to step each time.
Unfortunately, the world isn’t that kind. We don’t know the
mathematical form of the error function (there isn’t likely
one to know), so we have to approximate with our training
data. This approximation improves when using more
training data to determine the error. This fact argues for
using all the training data for each gradient descent step.
However, we already know this is computationally
extremely taxing in many cases.
    The compromise is to use minibatches for each gradient
descent step. The calculations are no longer too taxing, but
the approximation of the actual gradient is worse because
we are estimating it with fewer data points. Randomly
selecting something is often attached to the word
“stochastic,” so training with minibatches is known as
stochastic gradient descent. Stochastic gradient descent, in one
form or another, is the standard training approach used by
virtually all modern AI.
   At ﬁrst blush, stochastic gradient descent sounds like a
losing proposition. Sure, we can calculate many gradient
descent steps before the heat death of the universe, but our
gradient ﬁdelity is low, and we’re likely moving in the
wrong direction through the error space. That can’t be
good, can it?
   Here’s where Fortuna smiles on humanity a second
time. Not only has she given us the ability to train complex
models with ﬁrst-order gradient descent because local
minima are (assumed) roughly equivalent; she’s also
arranged things so that the “wrong” gradient direction
found by stochastic gradient descent is often what we need
to avoid local minima early in the training process. In other
words, walking slightly northeast when we should head due
north is a blessing in disguise that allows us to train large
neural networks.
                              ****
   We’re ready to move on to the next chapter. However,
before we do, let’s apply traditional neural networks to the
dinosaur footprint dataset. We’ll compare the results to the
classical models of Chapter 3.
    We need ﬁrst to select an architecture: that is, the
number of hidden layers, the number of nodes per layer,
and the type of activation function for each node. The
dinosaur footprint dataset has two classes: ornithischian
(class 0) and theropod (class 1). Therefore, the output node
should use a sigmoid activation function to give us a
likelihood of class 1 membership. The network’s output
value estimates the probability that the input image
represents a theropod. If the probability is above 50
percent, we’ll assign the input to class 1; otherwise, into
class 0 it goes. We’ll stick with rectiﬁed linear unit
activations for the hidden layer nodes, as we have for all the
models in this chapter. All that remains is to select the
number of hidden layers and the number of nodes per
layer.
   There are 1,336 training samples in the footprints
dataset. That’s not a lot, and we aren’t augmenting the
dataset, so we need a smallish model. Large models,
meaning many nodes and layers, require large training sets;
otherwise, there are too many weights and biases to learn
relative to the number of training samples. Therefore, we’ll
limit ourselves to trying at most two hidden layer models
for the footprints dataset. As for the number of nodes in
the hidden layers, we’ll let the ﬁrst hidden layer vary from
very small to nearly twice the input size of 1,600 features
(the 40×40-pixel image unraveled). If we try a second
hidden layer, we’ll restrict the number of nodes to no more
than half the number in the ﬁrst hidden layer.
   First, we’ll train a collection of one- and two-layer
architectures. Second, we’ll train the best performing of
those 100 times to give us an average level of performance.
Table 4-1 presents the trial models’ results.
Table 4-1: Trial Architectures with the Dinosaur Footprint Dataset


Accuracy (%) Architecture Weights and biases

 59.4                 10                  16,021

77.0                400                  640,801

 76.7                 800                 1,281,601

81.2                2,400                3,844,801
Accuracy (%) Architecture Weights and biases

 75.8            100, 50         165,201

81.2            800, 100        1,361,001

 77.9            2,400, 800      5,764,001


   The network with a mere 10 nodes in its hidden layer
was the worst, returning an accuracy of about 60 percent. A
binary classiﬁer that does nothing but ﬂips a coin is correct
about 50 percent of the time, so the 10-node network is
performing only slightly above chance. We don’t want that
one. Most of the other networks return accuracies in the
mid- to upper 70s.
    The two models in bold each produced just over 81
percent accuracy. The ﬁrst used a single hidden layer of
2,400 nodes. The second used a hidden layer of 800 nodes,
followed by another with 100 nodes. Both models produced
the same accuracy on the test set, but the 2,400-node
model had nearly three times as many weights and biases as
the two-layer model, so we’ll go with the two-layer model.
(Bear in mind that the results in Table 4-1 represent a
single training session, not the average of many. We’ll ﬁx
that shortly.)
   The two-layer model is still relatively large. We’re
trying to learn 1.4 million parameters to condition the
model to correctly classify the dinosaur footprint images.
That’s a lot of parameters to learn, especially with a
training set of only 1,336 samples. Fully connected neural
networks grow quickly in terms of the number of
parameters required. We’ll revisit this observation in
Chapter 5 when discussing convolutional neural networks.
   We have our architecture: two hidden layers using
rectiﬁed linear activation functions with 800 and 100 nodes,
respectively, followed by a single node using a sigmoid to
give us a likelihood of class 1 membership. Training the
model 100 times on the footprints dataset returned an
average accuracy of 77.4 percent, with a minimum of 69.3
percent and a maximum of 81.5 percent. Let’s put this
result in its proper relation to those of Chapter 3; see Table
4-2.
Table 4-2: Dinosaur Footprint Models


Model             Accuracy (%)

 RF300             83.3

RBF SVM           82.4

 7-NN              80.0

3-NN              77.6

 MLP               77.4

1-NN              76.1

 Linear SVM 70.7


   Recall that RF300 means a random forest with 300
trees, SVM refers to a support vector machine, and,
somewhat confusingly, NN refers to a nearest neighbor
classiﬁer. I’m using MLP (multilayer perceptron) as a
stand-in for our neural network. Multilayer perceptron is an
old but still common name for the traditional neural
networks we’ve been discussing in this chapter—notice the
link back to Rosenblatt’s original Perceptron from the late
1950s.
   Our neural network wasn’t the best performer on this
dataset. In fact, it was one of the worst. Additional tweaking
might move it up a place or two on the list, but this level of
performance is typical, in my experience, and contributed
to the general perception (pun intended) before the deep
learning revolution that neural networks are “meh” models
—run-of-the-mill, nothing to write home about.
                            ****
   This chapter introduced the fundamental ideas behind
modern neural networks. The remainder of the book builds
on the basic concepts covered in this chapter. Here are the
principal takeaways:

    Neural networks are collections of nodes (neurons)
    that accept multiple inputs and produce a single
    number as output.
    Neural networks are often arranged in layers so that
    the current layer’s input is the previous layer’s output.
    Neural networks are randomly initialized, so repeated
    training leads to differently performing models.
    Neural networks are trained by gradient descent, using
    the gradient direction supplied by backpropagation to
    update the weights and biases iteratively.

   Now, let’s press on to investigate convolutional neural
networks, the architecture that ushered in the deep
learning revolution. This chapter brought us to the early
2000s. The next moves us to 2012 and beyond.

                      KEY TERMS
  activation function, architecture, backward pass, bias,
  data augmentation, epoch, forward pass, global
  minimum, gradient descent, hidden layer, learning
  rate, local minimum, loss, minibatch, multilayer
  perceptron, neuron, node, overﬁtting, preprocessing,
  rectiﬁed linear unit, regularizer, sigmoid, stochastic
  gradient descent, weight
