                             5
 CONVOLUTIONAL NEURAL NETWORKS: AI
           LEARNS TO SEE




Classical machine learning models struggle with
appropriate feature selection, feature vector dimensionality,
and the inability to learn from the structure inherent in the
input. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) overcome these
issues by learning to generate new representations of their
inputs while simultaneously classifying them, a process
known as end-to-end learning. CNNs are the representation-
learning data processors I referred to in Chapter 2.
   Elements of what became CNNs appeared at various
times throughout the history of neural networks, beginning
with Rosenblatt’s Perceptron, but the architecture that
ushered in the deep learning revolution was published in
1998. Over a decade of additional improvements in
computing capability were required to unleash the full
power of CNNs with the appearance of AlexNet in 2012.
   Convolutional networks exploit structure in their inputs.
We’ll better understand what that means as the chapter
progresses. In one dimension, the inputs might be values
that change over time, also known as a time series. In two
dimensions, we’re talking about images. Three-dimensional
CNNs exist to interpret volumes of data, like a stack of
magnetic resonance images or a volume constructed from a
LiDAR point cloud. In this chapter, we’ll focus exclusively
on two-dimensional CNNs.
   The order in which features are presented to a
traditional neural network is irrelevant. Regardless of
whether we present feature vectors to the model as
(x0,x1,x2) or (x2,x0,x1), the model will learn just as well
because it assumes the features are independent and
unrelated to each other. Indeed, a strong correlation
between a pixel value and adjacent pixel values is something
traditional machine learning models do not want, and their
inability to achieve much success with such inputs held
neural networks back for years.
    Convolutional neural networks, on the other hand,
exploit structure in their inputs. For a CNN, it matters
whether we present the input as (x0,x1,x2) or (x2,x0,x1); the
model might learn well with the former and poorly with
the latter. This isn’t a weakness, but a strength, because we
want to apply CNNs to situations where there is structure
to learn—structure that helps determine how best to
classify inputs.
    Later in the chapter, we’ll compare the performance of a
traditional neural network to a CNN when classifying
small photos of animals and vehicles (the CIFAR-10 dataset
of Chapter 3). At that time, we’ll learn the true power of
exploiting structure. Before that, however, let’s conduct a
little experiment. We have two datasets. The ﬁrst is our old
friend, the MNIST digits dataset; the second is the same
collection of digit images, but the order of the pixels in the
images has been scrambled. The scrambling isn’t random
but consistent so that the pixel at position (1,12) has been
moved to, say, position (26,13), with similarly consistent
moves for all other pixels. Figure 5-1 shows some examples
of MNIST digits and scrambled versions of the same digits.
Figure 5-1: Example MNIST digits (top) and scrambled versions of the same
digits (bottom)
    The scrambled digits are incomprehensible to me. The
pixel information between the original and scrambled digits
is the same—that is, the same collection of pixel values is
present in both—but the structure is largely gone, and I can
no longer discern the digits. I claim that a traditional neural
network treats its inputs holistically and isn’t looking for
structure. If that’s the case, a traditional neural network
shouldn’t care that the digits have been scrambled; it should
learn just as well when trained using the original or the
scrambled dataset. As it turns out, that’s precisely what
happens. The model learns equally well; scrambling
changes nothing in terms of performance. Note, though,
that the scrambled test digits must be used with the
scrambled model; we shouldn’t expect the model to work
when trained on one dataset and tested on the other.
   We at present know only one fact about CNNs: they
pay attention to structure in their inputs. Knowing this,
should we expect a CNN trained on the scrambled dataset
to perform as well as one trained on the original dataset?
The scrambled digits are uninterpretable by us because
local structure in the images has been destroyed.
Therefore, we might expect a model that similarly wants to
exploit local structure to be unable to interpret the
scrambled digits. And that is the case: a CNN trained on
the scrambled dataset performs poorly compared to one
trained on the original dataset.
  Why can’t we easily interpret the scrambled digits? We
must explore what happens in the brain during vision to
answer that question. Then we’ll circle back to relate that
process to what CNNs do. As we’ll learn, CNNs follow the
old adage: when in Rome, do as the Romans (humans) do.
                                  ****
   Vincent van Gogh is my favorite artist. Something about
his style speaks to me, something strangely peaceful from a
man tormented by mental illness. I believe the peace
emanating from his work reﬂects his attempt to calm the
turmoil within.
   Consider Figure 5-2. It shows Van Gogh’s famous 1889
painting of his bedroom in Arles. The image is in black and
white, an unforgivable violence to Vincent’s use of color,
but print restrictions require it.




Figure 5-2: Van Gogh’s bedroom in Arles, 1889 (public domain)
   What do you see in the painting? I’m not asking about a
higher meaning or impression, but objectively, what do you
see in the painting? I see a bed, two chairs, a small table, a
window, and a pitcher on the table, among many other
items. I suspect you see the same. You saw the bed, two
chairs, and table, but how? Photons, particles of light,
traveled from the image to your eye and were converted
into discrete objects in your brain. Again, how?
   I’m asking questions but not yet offering answers. That’s
okay for two reasons. First, pondering the problem of
segmenting an image into a collection of meaningful
objects is worth some effort on our part. Second, no one
yet knows the full answer to “how?” Neuroscientists do,
however, understand the beginnings of the process.
    We take for granted the ability to look at a scene and
parse it into separate and identiﬁed objects. For us, the
process is effortless, completely automatic. We shouldn’t be
fooled. We’re the beneﬁciaries of hundreds of millions of
years of evolution’s tinkering. For mammals, vision begins
in the eye, but parsing and understanding begins in the
primary visual cortex at the back of our brains.
   The primary visual cortex, known as area V1, is sensitive
to edges and orientation. Immediately, we encounter a clue
to how vision works in the brain (as opposed to the eye).
The brain takes the input sensations, spread over V1 as a
warped image, and begins by seeking edges and the
orientation of the edges. V1 is additionally sensitive to
color. Mapping the entire visual ﬁeld over V1, with
magniﬁcation so that most of V1 is occupied by the central
2 percent of our visual ﬁeld, means that edge detection,
orientation, and color are local to where they occur.
   V1 sends its detections to area V2, which sends its
detections to area V3, and so on through V4 to V5, with
each area receiving, essentially, a representation of larger
and more grouped elements of what is in the visual ﬁeld.
The process starts with V1 and, eventually, delivers a fully
parsed and understood representation of what the eyes see.
As mentioned, the details much beyond V1 are murky, but
for our purposes all we need to remember is that V1 is
sensitive to edges, the orientation of edges, and colors (we
might also include textures). Starting simply and grouping
to separate objects in the scene is the name of the game.
CNNs mimic this process. It’s fair to say that CNNs
literally learn to see the world of their inputs.
   CNNs decompose inputs into small parts, then groups
of parts and still larger groups of groups of parts, until the
entire input is transformed from a single whole into a new
representation: one that is more easily understood by what
amounts to a traditional neural network sitting at the top of
the model. However, mapping the input to a new, more
easily understood representation does not imply that the
new representation is more easily understood by us.
   Convolutional neural networks learn during training to
partition inputs into parts, enabling the top layers of the
network to classify successfully. In other words, CNNs
learn new representations of their inputs and then classify
those new representations. Indeed, “Learning New
Representations from Old” was an early title for this
chapter.
   How do CNNs break their inputs into parts? To answer
that question, we must ﬁrst understand the “convolution”
part of “convolutional neural network.” Be warned, low-
level details ahead.
                             ****
   Convolution is a mathematical operation with a formal
deﬁnition involving integral calculus. Fortunately for us,
convolution is a straightforward operation in digital images,
using nothing more than multiplication and addition.
Convolution slides a small square, known as a kernel, over
the image from top to bottom and left to right. At each
position, convolution multiplies the pixel values covered by
the square with the corresponding kernel values. It then
sums all those products to produce a single number that
becomes the output pixel value for that position. Words
only go so far here, so let’s try a picture. Consider Figure 5-
3.




Figure 5-3: Convolving a kernel over an image
   The left side of Figure 5-3 shows a grid of numbers.
These are the pixel values for the center portion of the
image in Figure 5-4. Grayscale pixel values are typically in
the range 0 through 255, where lower values are darker.
The kernel is the 3×3 grid to the right. The convolution
operation instructs us to multiply each pixel value by the
corresponding kernel value. This produces the rightmost
3×3 grid of numbers. The ﬁnal step sums all nine values to
create a single output, 48, which replaces the center pixel in
the output image, 60 → 48.
   To complete the convolution, slide the 3×3 solid box one
pixel to the right and repeat. When the end of a row is
reached, move the box down one pixel and repeat for the
next row, then process row-by-row until the kernel has
covered the entire image. The convoluted image is the
collection of new output pixels.
    At ﬁrst, convolution might seem like a strange thing to
do. However, in digital images, convolution is a
fundamental operation. An appropriately deﬁned kernel
lets us ﬁlter an image to enhance it in various ways. For
example, Figure 5-4 shows four images. The upper left is
the original image, a frequently used test image of Gold
Hill in Shaftesbury, England. The remaining three images
are ﬁltered versions of the original. Clockwise from the
upper right, we have a blurred version, one showing
horizontal edges, and one showing vertical edges. Each
image is produced by convolving a kernel as described
previously. The kernel of Figure 5-3 produces the
horizontal-edge image at the lower right. Rotate the kernel
by 90 degrees, and you get the vertical-edge image at the
lower left. Finally, make all the kernel values 1, and you get
the blurred image at the upper right. Note that the edge
images are inverted to make the detected edges black
instead of white.




Figure 5-4: Convolution kernels in action
    The critical point for us to remember is that convolving
an image with different kernels highlights different aspects
of the image. It isn’t hard to imagine an appropriate set of
kernels extracting structure relevant to correctly classifying
the image. This is exactly what CNNs do during end-to-
end training and, in a sense, what our visual system does in
area V1 when it detects edges, orientations, colors, and
textures.
   We’re making progress. We now have a handle on the
core operation of a CNN, convolution, so let’s take the next
step to learn how convolution is used within a model to
extract structure and build a new representation of the
input.
                             ****
    The traditional neural networks of Chapter 4 consist of
a single kind of layer: a collection of fully connected nodes
accepting input from the layer below to produce output for
the layer above. Convolutional neural networks are more
ﬂexible and support diverse layer types. Regardless, the
data ﬂow is the same: from input to layer after layer to the
network’s output.
   In CNN parlance, the fully connected layers a
traditional neural network uses are called dense layers.
CNNs usually use dense layers at the top, near the output,
because by that time the network has transformed the input
into a new representation, one that the fully connected
layers can classify successfully. CNNs make heavy use of
convolutional layers and pooling layers.
   Convolutional layers apply a collection of kernels to their
input to produce multiple outputs, much as Figure 5-4
produced three outputs from the one input image at the
upper left. The kernels are learned during training using
the same backpropagation and gradient descent approach
we encountered in Chapter 4. The values of the learned
kernels are the weights of the convolutional layer.
   Pooling layers have no weights associated with them.
There’s nothing to learn. Rather, pooling layers perform a
ﬁxed operation on their inputs: they reduce the spatial
extent of their inputs by keeping the largest value in a 2×2
square moved without overlap across and then down. The
net effect is similar to reducing the size of an image by a
factor of two. Figure 5-5 illustrates the process of changing
an 8×8 input into a 4×4 output, keeping the maximum value
in each solid square. Pooling layers are a concession to
reduce the number of parameters in the network.




Figure 5-5: Pooling to reduce the spatial extent of the data
    A typical CNN combines convolutional and pooling
layers before topping things off with a dense layer or two.
ReLU layers are used as well, usually after the
convolutional and dense layers. For example, a classic
CNN architecture known as LeNet consists of the
following layers:




   The model uses three convolutional layers, two pooling
layers, and a single dense layer with 84 nodes. Each
convolutional and dense layer is followed by a ReLU layer
to map all negative inputs to zero while leaving all positive
inputs untouched.
    The number in parentheses for each convolutional layer
is the number of ﬁlters to learn in that layer. A ﬁlter is a
collection of convolutional kernels, with one kernel for
each input channel. For example, the ﬁrst convolutional
layer learns six ﬁlters. The input is a grayscale image with
one channel, so this layer learns six kernels. The second
convolutional layer learns 16 ﬁlters, each with 6 kernels,
one for each of the 6 input channels from the ﬁrst
convolutional layer. Therefore, the second convolutional
layer learns a total of 96 kernels. Finally, the last
convolutional layer learns 120 ﬁlters, each with 16 kernels,
for another 1,920 kernels. All told, the LeNet model needs
to learn 2,022 different convolutional kernels.
    The hope is that learning so many kernels will produce a
sequence of outputs that capture essential elements of the
structures in the input. If training is successful, the output
of the ﬁnal convolutional layer, as a vector input to the
dense layer, will contain values that clearly differentiate
between classes—at least, more clearly than can be
accomplished by using the image alone.
   If it feels like we’re in the weeds, we are, but we will not
dig further. We’ve reached the lowest level of detail we’ll
consider in the book, in fact, but it’s a necessary burden, as
we cannot understand how CNNs work if we don’t
understand convolution and convolutional layers.
   Perhaps the best way to understand what the layers of a
CNN are doing is to look at their effect on data ﬂowing
through the network. Figure 5-6 shows how a LeNet
model trained on MNIST digits manipulates two input
images. The output of the ﬁrst convolutional layer is the six
middle images, where gray represents zero, darker pixels
are increasingly negative, and lighter pixels are increasingly
positive. The six kernels of the ﬁrst convolutional layer
each produce an output image for the single input image.
The kernels highlight different portions of the inputs as
transitions from dark to light.
Figure 5-6: Input to ﬁrst convolutional layer to dense layer
    The rightmost barcode-like pattern is a representation
of the dense layer’s output. We’re ignoring the output of
the second and third convolutional layers and jumping
directly to the end of the model. The dense layer’s output is
a vector of 84 numbers. For Figure 5-6, I mapped these
numbers to pixel values, where larger values correspond to
darker vertical bars.
   Notice that the barcodes for the digits 0 and 8 differ. If
the model learned well, we might expect the barcodes for
the dense layer outputs to share commonalities across
digits. In other words, the barcodes for zeros should look
roughly similar, as should the barcodes for eights. Do they?
Consider Figure 5-7.




Figure 5-7: Dense layer output for sample inputs
    This ﬁgure presents the dense layer outputs for ﬁve
different zero and eight inputs. The barcodes are all
different but share similarities according to digit. This is
especially true for the zeros. The LeNet model has learned
how to map each 28×28-pixel input image (784 pixels) into
a vector of 84 numbers that show strong similarities by
digit type. Based on our experience with traditional neural
networks, we can appreciate that this mapping has
produced something of lower dimensionality that preserves
and even emphasizes differences between digits. The
learned lower-dimensionality vector is akin to a complex
concept explained with a few well-chosen words. This is
exactly what we want a CNN to do. The trained model
learned to “see” in the world of handwritten digits
represented as small grayscale images. There’s nothing
special about grayscale images, either. CNNs are quite
happy to work with color images represented by red, green,
and blue channels, or any number of channels, as when
using multiband satellite imagery.
   We might think of the model this way: the CNN layers
before the dense layer learned how to act as a function
producing an output vector from the input image. The true
classiﬁer is the dense layer at the top, but it works well
because the CNN learned the classiﬁer (dense layer) while
simultaneously learning the mapping function.
   I stated earlier that higher layers in the CNN pay
attention to ever larger parts of the input. We can see that
this is so by considering the portion of the input that
inﬂuences the output of a kernel at a deeper layer. Figure 5-
8 demonstrates this effect.




Figure 5-8: The part of the input affecting deeper layers of the model
   Begin on the right side of the image. The 3×3 grid of
squares represents the output of a kernel at convolutional
layer 1. We want to know what portion of the input
inﬂuences the value of the shaded pixel. Looking at the
previous convolutional layer, layer 0, we see that the layer 1
output depends on the nine shaded values coming from the
layer before.
    The nine shaded values of convolutional layer 0 depend
on the 5×5 shaded region of the input. It’s 5×5 because each
of the nine values is found by sliding a 3×3 kernel over the
shaded 5×5 region of the input. For example, the dotted
portion of the middle value in layer 0 comes from the
similarly shaded 3×3 region of the input. In this way, higher
CNN layers are affected by larger and larger portions of
the input. The technical term for this is the effective receptive
ﬁeld, where the effective receptive ﬁeld of the rightmost
shaded value in Figure 5-8 is the 5×5 shaded region of the
input.
                              ****
   It’s time for an experiment. We now have a handle on
how CNNs function, so let’s put that knowledge to work to
compare a traditional neural network with a convolutional
model. Which will win? I suspect you already know the
answer, but let’s prove it and gain some experience along
the way.
   We need a dataset. Let’s use a grayscale version of
CIFAR-10. This is a better choice than the dinosaur
footprint dataset we used in the previous two chapters
because the footprint images are outlines devoid of texture
and background, and a CNN will not learn much more
from such images than a traditional model. As we learned
in Chapter 3, CIFAR-10 contains 32×32-pixel images of
animals and vehicles, which will likely be more challenging.
   We’ll train three models: a random forest, a traditional
neural network, and a convolutional neural network. Is this
sufﬁcient? We’ve come to appreciate that all three of these
models involve randomness, so training once might not
give us a fair representation of how each model performs.
After all, we might get a lousy initialization or mix of trees
that would throw one of the models off. Therefore, let’s
train each model 10 times and average the results.
   This experiment will help us understand the differences
in performance between the models, but we can learn still
more about the neural networks by tracking their errors as
training progresses. The result is a graph, which I’ll present
and then explain shortly. Before that, however, let me lay
out the details of the models.
   The training and test datasets are the same for each
model. The traditional neural network and the random
forest require vector inputs, so each 32×32-pixel image is
unraveled into a vector of 1,024 numbers. The CNN works
with the actual two-dimensional images. There are 50,000
images in the training set, 5,000 for each of the 10 classes,
and 10,000 images in the test set, 1,000 per class.
   The random forest uses 300 trees. The traditional
neural network has two hidden layers of 512 and 100
nodes, respectively. The CNN is more complex, with four
convolutional layers, two pooling layers, and a single dense
layer of 472 nodes. Even though the CNN has many more
layers, the total number of weights and biases to learn is
nearly identical to the traditional model: 577,014 versus
577,110.
   We’ll train the neural networks for 100 epochs, meaning
100 passes through the full training set. Fixing the
minibatch size at 200 gives us 250 gradient descent steps
per epoch. Therefore, during training, we’ll update the
weights and biases of the networks 25,000 times. At the end
of each epoch, we’ll capture the error made by the model
on both the training and test sets. When the dust settles, a
single graph will reveal everything we want to know.
   Figure 5-9 is that graph. It’s the most complex graph
we’ve seen, so let’s walk through it in detail, beginning with
the axes.
Figure 5-9: CIFAR-10 results for a CNN, MLP, and random forest
   The label on the horizontal axis (x-axis) is “epoch,”
which means a complete pass through the training set.
Therefore, the graph shows things changing during
training after every epoch. We also know that each epoch
represents 250 gradient descent steps. The vertical axis (y-
axis) is labeled “error” and runs from 0.1 to 0.8. This axis
represents the fraction of the test or training samples that
the model gets wrong. The lower the error, the better. A
decimal value of 0.1 means 10 percent, and a value of 0.8
means 80 percent.
    The legend in the upper-right corner of the graph tells
us that the circles and squares relate to the MLP, the
traditional neural network, while the triangles and
pentagons refer to the CNN. Speciﬁcally, the circles and
triangles track the error on the test set for the MLP and
CNN, respectively, as the models train. Similarly, the
squares and pentagons track the error on the training set.
Recall that the model’s performance on the training set is
used to update the weights and biases. The test set is used
for evaluation and does not contribute to how the model is
trained.
    The MLP plots show us how well the model learned the
training set (squares) and the test set (circles) as training
continued, epoch after epoch. It’s immediately apparent
that the model learned the training set better than the test
set because the training set error decreases continuously.
This is what we expect. The gradient descent algorithm
will update the weights and biases of the MLP, all 577,110
of them, to arrive at a lower and lower error on the training
set. However, we’re not interested in reaching zero error
on the training set; instead, we want the smallest error
possible on the test set because that gives us a reason to
believe that the MLP has learned to generalize.
    Now consider the circle plot showing us the test set
error. It reaches a minimum of about 0.56, or 56 percent, at
around 40 epochs. After that, the error increases slowly but
steadily, up to 100 epochs. This effect is classic MLP
overﬁtting. The training set error continues to decrease,
but the test set error hits a minimum and continues to
increase after that. Figure 5-9 tells us that stopping training
at 40 epochs would have given us the best-performing
MLP.
   We’ll get to the CNN results, but for the moment,
consider the dashed line at 58 percent error. It’s labeled
“RF300” and shows us the test set error from a random
forest with 300 trees. The random forest doesn’t learn by
updating weights over epochs, so the 58 percent error is
just that: the model’s error. I plotted it as a dashed line
parallel to the horizontal axis so you can see that, brieﬂy,
the MLP did slightly better than the random forest, but by
100 epochs, the difference between the two models was
negligible. In other words, we might take it that classical
machine learning’s best effort on the grayscale CIFAR-10
dataset is an error of about 56 to 58 percent. That’s not a
good result. Additional time spent with the parameters of
the random forest, or the MLP, or starting over with a
support vector machine might lead to a slight reduction in
the error. Still, it’s unlikely to overcome the fact that
classical machine learning cannot do much with this
dataset.
    Finally, consider the CNN’s training (pentagon) and test
(triangle) curves. By 100 epochs, the CNN is right around
11 percent error on the training set and, more importantly,
about 23 percent on the test set. In other words, the CNN
is right 77 percent of the time, or nearly 8 times in 10.
Random guessing will be correct about 10 percent of the
time on a 10-class dataset, so the CNN has learned rather
well, and far better than the MLP or random forest.
   This is precisely the point of convolutional neural
networks: by learning to represent the parts of the objects
in an image, it becomes possible to learn a new
representation (formally known as an embedding) that the
dense layers of the network can successfully classify.
   The ﬁrst CNN I trained, in 2015, attempted to detect
small airplanes in satellite images. My initial, non-CNN
approach worked, but it was noisy with many false positives
(fake detections). The airplanes were there, but so were
many other things that were not airplanes. I then trained a
simple CNN like the one used in this experiment. It
located the airplanes with ease, and virtually nothing but
the airplanes. I was dumbfounded and realized then that
deep learning was a paradigm shift. I’ll argue in Chapter 7
that as of fall 2022, a new, more profound paradigm shift
has occurred, but we have some ground yet to cover before
we’re ready for that discussion.
                            ****
   The simple CNNs of this chapter don’t do justice to the
zoo of available neural network architectures. A decade of
fevered development has resulted in a few go-to CNN
architectures, some with over 100 layers. The architectures
have names like ResNet, DenseNet, Inception, MobileNet,
and U-Net, among many others. The U-Net is worthy of a
few words.
   The CNNs we’ve explored so far accept an input image
and return a class label like “dog” or “cat.” It doesn’t need
to be this way. Some CNN architectures implement
semantic segmentation, where the output is another image
with every pixel labeled by the class to which it belongs. U-
Nets do this. If every pixel of the dog is marked “dog,”
extracting the dog from the image becomes trivial. A
middle ground between a U-Net and CNNs that assign a
single label to the entire image is a model that outputs a
bounding box, a rectangle surrounding the detected object.
The pervasiveness of AI means that you’ve likely already
seen images with labeled bounding boxes. YOLO (“you
only look once”) is a popular architecture producing
labeled bounding boxes; Faster R-CNN is another.
   We focused on image inputs here, but the input need
not be an image. Anything representable in an image-like
format, where there are two dimensions and structure
within those dimensions, is a candidate for a 2D CNN. A
good example is an audio signal, which we usually think of
as one-dimensional, a voltage changing over time that
drives the speaker. However, audio signals contain energy
at different frequencies. The energy at different frequencies
can be displayed in two dimensions: the horizontal
dimension is time, and the vertical dimension is frequency,
usually with lower frequencies at the bottom and higher
frequencies at the top. The intensity of each frequency
becomes the intensity of a pixel to transform the audio
signal from a one-dimensional, time-varying voltage into a
two-dimensional spectrogram, as shown in Figure 5-10.
Figure 5-10: Mapping from one-dimensional data to a two-dimensional
image
   The spectrogram, here of a crying baby, contains a
wealth of information and structure that the CNN can
learn about to produce a better model than is possible with
the one-dimensional audio signal alone. The key
observation is that any transformation of the input data that
extracts structure in a form amenable to a CNN is fair
game.
                                  ****
    You have a dataset and need to build a CNN. What
architecture should you use? What should the minibatch
size be? What layers do you need, and in what order?
Should you use 5×5 or 3×3 convolutional kernels? How
many epochs of training is enough? Early on, before the
development of standard architectures, each of those
questions had to be answered by the person designing the
network. It was a bit like medicine of the past: a mix of
science, experience, and intuition. The art of neural
networks meant that practitioners were in high demand,
and it was difﬁcult for savvy software engineers to add deep
learning to their repertoires. Some people wondered if
software could be used to determine the model’s
architecture and training parameters automatically (that is,
its hyperparameters, introduced in Chapter 3). And so,
automatic machine learning, or AutoML, was born.
   Most cloud-based commercial machine learning
platforms, like Microsoft’s Azure Machine Learning or
Amazon’s SageMaker Autopilot, include an AutoML tool
that will create the machine learning model for you; you
need only supply the dataset. AutoML applies to more than
just neural networks, and many tools include classical
machine learning models as well. AutoML’s entire purpose
is to locate the best model type for the supplied dataset
with a minimum of user expertise required.
    I want to argue that AutoML only goes so far and that
the best deep learning practitioners will always outperform
it, but that argument rings hollow. It reminds me of the
assembly language programmers of old pontiﬁcating on the
impossibility of compilers ever producing code that was as
good as or better than what they could produce. There are
few job openings these days for assembly language
programmers, but tens of thousands for programmers using
compiled languages (at least for now; see Chapter 8). That
said, some of us still prefer to roll our own models.
                             ****
    A consequence of the deep learning revolution was the
creation of powerful, open source machine learning toolkits
with names like TensorFlow and PyTorch. Implementing a
traditional, fully connected neural network is an exercise
for machine learning students. It’s not trivial, but it’s
something most people can accomplish with effort.
Properly implementing a CNN, on the other hand,
especially one supporting a multitude of layer types, is
anything but trivial. The AI community committed early
on to developing open source toolkits supporting deep
learning, including CNNs. Without these toolkits, progress
in AI would be painfully slow. Large tech companies like
Google, Facebook (Meta), and NVIDIA also signed on,
and their continued support for toolkit development is
critical to AI.
    What makes the toolkits powerful, besides the
mountains of tested, high-performance code they contain,
is their ﬂexibility. We now appreciate that training a neural
network, CNN or otherwise, requires two steps:
backpropagation and gradient descent. Backpropagation
works only if the model’s layers support a particular
mathematical operation known as differentiation.
Differentiation is what ﬁrst semester calculus students
learn. So long as the toolkits can automatically determine
the derivatives (what you get when you differentiate), they
allow users to implement arbitrary layers. The toolkits
employ automatic differentiation by transforming the neural
network into a computational graph.
   It’s tempting to take a few steps down the path of
automatic differentiation and computational graphs
because the elegance and ﬂexibility therein is a beautiful
marriage of mathematics and computer science.
Unfortunately, you’ll need to take my word for it because
the level of detail necessary is far beyond what we can
explore in this book. One key point is that there are two
primary approaches to automatic differentiation: forward
and reverse. Forward automatic differentiation is easier to
conceptualize and implement in code but is unsuited to
neural networks. That’s too bad, in a way, because forward
automatic differentiation is best implemented using dual
numbers, an obscure type of number invented (discovered?)
by English mathematician William Clifford in 1873. These
were a prime example of math for math’s sake and largely
forgotten until the age of computers, when they were
suddenly made useful. Reverse automatic differentiation is
best for neural networks but doesn’t use dual numbers.
                             ****
   This chapter was challenging. We dove more deeply
into the details than we did in previous chapters or will in
the following ones. A summary is deﬁnitely required.
Convolutional neural networks:

    Thrive on structure in their inputs, which is the
    complete opposite of classical machine learning
    models
    Learn new representations of their inputs by breaking
    them into parts and groups of parts
    Use many different kinds of layers combined in
    various ways
    Can classify inputs, localize inputs, or assign a class
    label to every pixel in their inputs
    Are still trained via backpropagation and gradient
    descent, just like traditional neural networks
    Drove the creation of powerful, open source toolkits
    that democratized deep learning

   Convolutional neural networks follow in the tradition of
classical machine learning models: they take an input and
assign to it, in some fashion, a class label. The network
operates as a mathematical function, accepting an input and
producing an output. The next chapter introduces us to
neural networks that generate output without input.
   To paraphrase an old television show: you’re traveling
through another dimension, a dimension not only of sight
and sound but of mind, a journey into a wondrous land
whose boundaries are that of imagination—next stop,
generative AI.

                     KEY TERMS
  automatic differentiation, AutoML, bounding box,
  computational graph, convolution, convolutional
  layer, convolutional neural network, dense layer,
  effective receptive ﬁeld, embedding, end-to-end
  learning, ﬁlter, kernel, pooling layer, semantic
  segmentation
