                             2
          WHY NOW? A HISTORY OF AI




Rowan Atkinson’s comic masterpiece Mr. Bean opens in the
dead of night on a deserted London street. A spotlight
appears, the title character falls from the sky, and a choir
sings in Latin, “ecce homo qui est faba”—behold the man
who is a bean. Mr. Bean picks himself up, brushes off his
suit, and runs awkwardly into the darkness. He is
something otherworldly, a thing that literally fell from the
sky, defying comprehension.
   Given the parade of AI wonder after wonder in recent
years, we might be excused for thinking that AI, like Mr.
Bean, fell from the sky, fully formed and beyond our
comprehension. However, none of this is true; indeed, I’d
argue that AI is still in its infancy.
   So why are we hearing about AI now? I’ll answer that
question with a brief (and biased) history of AI, followed by
a discussion of the advances in computing that acted as the
catalyst for the AI revolution. This chapter provides
context for the models we’ll explore throughout the
remainder of the book.
                            ****
    Since its inception, AI has been divided into two main
camps: symbolic AI and connectionism. Symbolic AI
attempts to model intelligence by manipulating symbols
and logical statements or associations. Connectionism,
however, attempts to model intelligence by building
networks of simpler components. The human mind
embodies both approaches. We use symbols as elements of
thought and language, and our minds are constructed from
unbelievably complex networks of neurons, each neuron a
simple processor. In computer programming terms, the
symbolic approach to AI is top-down, while connectionism
is bottom-up. Top-down design starts with high-level tasks,
then breaks those tasks into smaller and smaller pieces. A
bottom-up design begins with smaller pieces and combines
them together.
   Proponents of symbolic AI believe that intelligence can
be achieved in the abstract, without a substrate resembling
a brain. Connectionists follow the evolutionary
development of brains and argue that there needs to be
some foundation, like a massive collection of highly
interconnected neurons, from which intelligence (however
deﬁned) can emerge.
   While the debate between symbolic AI and
connectionism was long-lived, with the advent of deep
learning it’s safe to say that the connectionists have won the
day—though perhaps not the war. Recent years have seen a
smattering of papers blending the two approaches. I suspect
symbolic AI has a cameo or two left in it, if not ultimately
starring in a supporting role.
    My introduction to AI in the late 1980s was entirely
symbolic. Connectionism was mentioned as another
approach, but neural networks were thought inferior and
likely to be marginally useful at best.
   A complete history of artiﬁcial intelligence is beyond
our scope. Such a magnum opus awaits a motivated and
capable historian. Instead, I’ll focus on the development of
machine learning while (very unfairly!) ignoring the
mountain of effort expended over the decades by those in
the symbolic camp. Know, however, that for most of AI’s
history, people mostly spoke of symbolic AI, not
connectionism. For a fairer presentation, I recommend
Michael Wooldridge’s book A Brief History of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (Flatiron Books, 2021), or Pamela McCorduck’s
deeply personal account in This Could Be Important: My Life
and Times with the Artiﬁcial Intelligentsia (Lulu Press, 2019).
    With my apparent connectionist bias in mind, let’s take
a stroll through the history of machine learning.


Pre-1900
The dream of intelligent machines dates back to antiquity.
Ancient Greeks related the myth of Talos, a giant robot
meant to guard the Phoenician princess, Europa.
Throughout the Middle Ages and Renaissance, many
automatons—machines that moved and appeared lifelike—
were developed. However, I suspect that none were
believed to be intelligent or capable of thought. Some were
even hoaxes, like the infamous Mechanical Turk that
wowed the world by playing, and beating, many skilled
chess players. In the end, it was discovered that a person
hiding within the machine could control the “automaton”
by manipulating a mechanical arm to move free-standing
chess pieces on the board while viewing the board
conﬁguration from beneath. Still, the mechanical part of
the machine was rather impressive for the late 18th century.
   Apart from automatons, there were also early attempts
to understand thought as a mechanical process and efforts
to produce a logical system capable of capturing thought.
In the 17th century, Gottfried Leibniz described such a
concept abstractly as an “alphabet of thought.” In the
1750s, Julien Offray de La Mettrie published L’Homme
Machine (Man as Machine), arguing that thought is a
mechanical process.
    The idea that human thought might emerge from the
physical entity of the brain rather than the spiritual soul
marked the beginning of a new chapter on the road to AI.
If our minds are biological machines, why can’t there be
another kind of machine that thinks?
    In the 19th century, George Boole attempted to create a
calculus of thought, resulting in what we know now as
Boolean algebra. Computers depend on Boolean algebra, to
the point that it represents their very implementation as
collections of digital logic gates. Boole was partially
successful, but he didn’t achieve his stated goal: “to
investigate the fundamental laws of those operations of the
mind by which reasoning is performed; to give expression
to them in the symbolic language of a Calculus” (The Laws
of Thought, 1854). That Boole was willing to try
represented another step toward the notion that AI might
be possible.
   What these early attempts were lacking was an actual
calculating machine. People could dream of artiﬁcial minds
or beings (like the creature from Mary Shelley’s
Frankenstein) and, assuming their existence, discuss the
repercussions. But until there was a machine capable of
plausibly mimicking (implementing?) thought, all else was
speculation.
    It was Englishman Charles Babbage who, in the mid-
19th century, ﬁrst conceived of an implementable general-
purpose calculating machine: the Analytical Engine. The
Engine was never built in its entirety, but it contained all
the essential components of a modern computer and would,
in theory, be capable of the same operations. While it’s
unclear if Babbage appreciated the potential versatility of
his machine, his friend, Ada Lovelace, did. She wrote about
the machine as a widely applicable, general-purpose device.
Still, she did not believe the Engine was capable of thought,
as this quote from her Sketch of the Analytical Engine (1843)
demonstrates:
     The Analytical Engine has no pretensions whatever to originate
     anything. It can do whatever we know how to order it to perform.
     It can follow analysis; but it has no power of anticipating any
     analytical relations or truths. Its province is to assist us in making
     available what we are already acquainted with.

   This quote may be the ﬁrst to refer to the possibility of
artiﬁcial intelligence involving a device potentially capable
of achieving it. The phrase “do whatever we know how to
order it to perform” implies programming. Indeed,
Lovelace wrote a program for the Analytical Engine.
Because of this, many people consider her to be the ﬁrst
computer programmer. The fact that her program had a
bug in it proves to me that she was; nothing is more
emblematic of programming than bugs, as my 40-plus years
of programming experience have demonstrated
distressingly often.


1900 to 1950
In 1936, a 24-year-old Englishman named Alan Turing,
still a student at the time, wrote a paper that has since
become the cornerstone of computer science. In this paper,
Turing introduced a generic conceptual machine, what we
now call a Turing machine, and demonstrated that it could
calculate anything representable by an algorithm. He also
explained that there are things that cannot be implemented
by algorithms and that are, therefore, uncomputable. Since
all modern programming languages are equivalent to a
Turing machine, modern computers can implement any
algorithm and compute anything computable. However,
this says nothing about how long the computation might
take or the memory required.
   If a computer can compute anything that can be
implemented as an algorithm, then a computer can perform
any mental operation a human can perform. At last, here
was the engine that might enable true artiﬁcial intelligence.
Turing’s 1950 paper “Computing Machinery and
Intelligence” was an early recognition that digital
computers might eventually lead to intelligent machines. In
this paper, Turing described his “imitation game,” known
now as the Turing test, by which humans might come to
believe that a machine is intelligent. Many claims of AI
systems that pass the Turing test have appeared, especially
in recent years. One of these is OpenAI’s ChatGPT.
However, few would be inclined to believe that ChatGPT
is truly intelligent—in other words, I suspect that this test
fails to capture what humans generally understand this
term to mean, and a new test will likely be created at some
point.
    In 1943, Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts wrote “A
Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity,”
which deserves an award for one of the most opaque yet
intriguing paper titles ever. The paper represents “nervous
nets” (collections of neurons) as logical statements in
mathematics. The logical statements are difﬁcult to parse
(at least for me), but the authors’ description of “nets
without circles” bears a strong resemblance to the neural
networks we’ll explore in Chapter 4—indeed, one could
argue that McCulloch and Pitts’s groundbreaking paper led
to what we now recognize as a neural network. Frankly,
neural networks are far easier to parse and understand,
which is good news for us.
   The progression from fantastical stories about
artiﬁcially intelligent machines and beings to a serious
investigation of whether mathematics can capture thought
and reasoning, combined with the realization that digital
computers are capable of computing anything that can be
described by an algorithm, set the stage for the advent of
artiﬁcial intelligence as a legitimate research enterprise.


1950 to 1970
The 1956 Dartmouth Summer Research Project on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence workshop is generally regarded as the
birthplace of AI, and where the phrase “artiﬁcial
intelligence” was ﬁrst used consistently. The Dartmouth
workshop had fewer than 50 participants, but the list
included several well-known names in the worlds of
computer science and mathematics: Ray Solomonoff, John
McCarthy, Marvin Minsky, Claude Shannon, John Nash,
and Warren McCulloch, among others. At the time,
computer science was a subﬁeld of mathematics. The
workshop was a brainstorming session that set the stage for
early AI research.
   In 1957, Frank Rosenblatt of Cornell University created
the Mark I Perceptron, widely recognized as the ﬁrst
application of neural networks. The Perceptron was
remarkable in many respects, including that it was designed
for image recognition, the same application where deep
learning ﬁrst proved itself in 2012.
    Figure 2-1 shows the conceptual organization as given
in the Perceptron Operators’ Manual. The Perceptron used a
20×20-pixel digitized television image as input, which was
then passed through a “random” set of connections to a set
of association units that led to response units. This
conﬁguration is similar to some approaches to deep
learning on images in use today and resembles a type of
neural network known as an extreme learning machine.
Figure 2-1: The organization of the Mark I Perceptron
   If the Perceptron was on the right track, why was it all
but forgotten for decades? One reason was Rosenblatt’s
penchant for hype. At a 1958 conference organized by the
US Navy (a sponsor of the Perceptron project),
Rosenblatt’s comments were so hyperbolic that the New
York Times reported:
      The Navy revealed the embryo of an electronic computer today
      that it expects will be able to walk, talk, see, write, reproduce itself
      and be conscious of its existence. Later perceptrons will be able to
      recognize people and call out their names and instantly translate
      speech in one language to speech and writing in another language,
      it was predicted.

   The comments rufﬂed many feathers at the time,
though as modern AI systems do allow machines to walk,
talk, see, write, recognize people, and translate speech and
writing between languages, perhaps we should be more
forgiving toward Rosenblatt. He was only some 60 years
early.
   A few years later, in 1963, Leonard Uhr and Charles
Vossler described a program that, like the Perceptron,
interpreted a 20×20-pixel image represented as a matrix of
0s and 1s. Unlike the Perceptron, this program was able to
generate the patterns and combinations of image features
necessary to learn its inputs. Uhr and Vossler’s program was
similar to the convolutional neural networks that appeared
over 30 years later and are the subject of Chapter 5.
    The ﬁrst of what I call the “classical” machine learning
models appeared in 1967, courtesy of Thomas Cover and
Peter Hart. Known as nearest neighbors, it is the simplest of
all machine learning models, almost embarrassingly so. To
label an unknown input, it simply ﬁnds the known input
most like it and uses that input’s label as the output. When
using more than one nearby known input, the method is
called k-nearest neighbors, where k is a small number, like 3
or 5. Hart went on to write the ﬁrst edition of Pattern
Classiﬁcation, along with Richard Duda and David Stork, in
1973; this seminal work introduced many computer
scientists and software engineers to machine learning,
including me.
   The success of the Perceptron came to a screeching halt
in 1969, when Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert
published their book Perceptrons, which demonstrated that
single- and two-layer perceptron networks weren’t able to
model interesting tasks. We’ll cover what “single-layer” and
“two-layer” mean in time. Perceptrons, coupled with the
1973 release of “Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A General Survey”
by James Lighthill, universally known as “the Lighthill
report,” ushered in what is now referred to as the ﬁrst AI
winter; funding for AI research dried up in short order.
   Minsky and Papert’s criticisms of the perceptron model
were legitimate; however, many people missed their
observation that such limitations were not applicable to
more complex perceptron models. Regardless, the damage
was done, and connectionism virtually vanished until the
early 1980s.
    Note the “virtually.” In 1979, Kunihiko Fukushima
released a paper that was translated into English in 1980 as
“Neocognitron: A Self-Organizing Neural Network Model
for a Mechanism of Pattern Recognition Unaffected by
Shift in Position.” The name “Neocognitron” didn’t catch
on, and this was perhaps one of the last uses of the “-tron”
sufﬁx that had been so popular in computer science for the
previous three decades. While Uhr and Vossler’s 1963
program bore some similarities to a convolutional neural
network, the Neocognitron is, to many people, the original.
The success of convolutional neural networks led directly
to the current AI revolution.


1980 to 1990
In the early 1980s, AI went commercial with the advent of
computers speciﬁcally designed to run the Lisp
programming language, then the lingua franca of AI.
(Today, it’s Python.) Along with Lisp machines came the
rise of expert systems—software designed to capture the
knowledge of an expert in a narrow domain. The
commercialization of AI brought the ﬁrst AI winter to an
end.
   The concept behind expert systems is, admittedly,
seductive. To build an expert system that, for example,
diagnoses a particular kind of cancer, you ﬁrst interview
experts to extract their knowledge and arrange it in a
knowledge base. A knowledge base represents knowledge as
a combination of rules and facts. Then, you combine the
knowledge base with an inference engine, which uses the
knowledge base to decide when and how to execute rules
based on stored facts or input to the system by a user. Rules
ﬁre based on facts, which may lead to placing new facts in
the knowledge base that cause additional rules to ﬁre, and
so on. A classic example of an expert system is CLIPS,
which NASA developed in 1985 and released into the
public domain in 1996.
   In an expert system, there’s no connectionist network or
collection of units from which one might (hopefully) cause
intelligent behavior to emerge, making it a good example of
symbolic AI. Instead, the knowledge base is an essentially
rigid collection of rules, like “if the engine temperature is
above this threshold, then this other thing is the likely
cause,” and facts, like “the engine temperature is below the
threshold.” Knowledge engineers are the links between the
experts and the expert system. Building a knowledge base
from the experts’ answers to the questions posed by the
knowledge engineers is complex, and the resulting
knowledge base is hard to modify over time. However, the
difﬁculty in designing expert systems doesn’t mean they’re
useless; they still exist, mainly under the guise of “business
rule management systems,” but currently have minimal
impact on modern AI.
   The hype surrounding expert systems, combined with
early successes, drove renewed interest in AI in the early
1980s. But when it became clear that expert systems were
too brittle to have a general use, the bottom fell out of the
industry, and AI’s second winter hit in the middle of the
decade.
    During the 1980s, connectionists occupied the
background, but they were not sitting still. In 1982, John
Hopﬁeld demonstrated what are now known as Hopﬁeld
networks. A Hopﬁeld network is a type of neural network
that stores information in a distributed way within the
weights of the network, and then extracts that information
at a later time. Hopﬁeld networks aren’t widely used in
modern deep learning, but they proved an important
demonstration of the utility of the connectionist approach.
   In 1986, David Rumelhart, Geoffrey Hinton, and
Ronald Williams released their paper “Learning
Representations by Back-propagating Errors,” which
outlined the backpropagation algorithm for training neural
networks. Training a neural network involves adjusting the
weights between the neurons so that the network operates
as desired. The backpropagation algorithm was the key to
making this process efﬁcient by calculating how adjusting a
particular weight affects the network’s overall performance.
With this information, it becomes possible to iteratively
train the network by applying known training data, then
using the network’s errors when classifying to adjust the
weights to force the network to perform better on the next
iteration. (I’ll discuss neural network training in more
depth in Chapter 4.) With backpropagation, neural
networks could go well beyond the limited performance of
Rosenblatt’s Perceptron. However, even with
backpropagation, neural networks in the 1980s were little
more than toys. While there’s contention about who
invented backpropagation and when, the 1986 paper is
generally understood to be the presentation that inﬂuenced
neural network researchers the most.


1990 to 2000
The second AI winter extended into the 1990s, but
research continued in both the symbolic and connectionist
camps. Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik introduced
the machine learning community to support vector machines
(SVMs) in 1995. In a sense, SVMs represent the high-water
mark of classical machine learning. The success of SVMs in
the 1990s through the early 2000s held neural networks at
bay. Neural networks require large datasets and signiﬁcant
computational power; SVMs, on the other hand, are often
less demanding of resources. Neural networks gain their
power from the network’s ability to represent a function, a
mapping from inputs to the desired outputs, while SVMs
use clever mathematics to simplify difﬁcult classiﬁcation
problems.
   The success of SVMs was noted in the academic
community as well as the broader world of software
engineering, where applications involving machine learning
were increasing. The general public was largely unaware of
these advances, though intelligent machines continued
appearing frequently in science ﬁction.
   This AI winter ended in 1997 with the victory of IBM’s
Deep Blue supercomputer against then world chess
champion Garry Kasparov. At the time, few people thought
a machine could ever beat the best human chess player.
Interestingly, a decade earlier, one of my professors had
predicted that an AI would accomplish this feat before the
year 2000. Was this professor clairvoyant? Not really. Deep
Blue combined fast custom hardware with sophisticated
software and applied known AI search algorithms (in
particular, the Minimax algorithm). Combined with
heuristics and a healthy dose of custom knowledge from
other chess grandmasters, Deep Blue was able to out-
evaluate its human opponent by searching more possible
moves than any human could ever hope to contemplate.
Regardless, at its core, Deep Blue implemented what AI
experts knew could beat a human if the machine had enough
resources at its disposal. Deep Blue’s victory was inevitable
because researchers expected computers to eventually
become fast enough to overcome a human’s abilities. What
was needed was known; all that remained was to put the
pieces together.
   The year 1998 saw the publication of “Gradient-Based
Learning Applied to Document Recognition,” a paper by
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick
Haffner that escaped public notice but was a watershed
moment for AI and the world. While Fukushima’s
Neocognitron bore strong similarities to the convolutional
neural networks that initiated the modern AI revolution,
this paper introduced them directly, as well as the
(in)famous MNIST dataset we used in Chapter 1. The
advent of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in 1998
begs the question: why did it take another 14 years before
the world took notice? We’ll return to this question later in
the chapter.
2000 to 2012
Leo Breiman introduced random forests in 2001 by forming
the existing pieces of what would become the random
forest algorithm into a coherent whole, much like Darwin
did with evolution in the 19th century. Random forests are
the last of the classical machine learning algorithms we’ll
contemplate in Chapter 3. If “random forests” remind you
of the decision trees in Chapter 1, there’s a reason: a
random forest is a forest of decision trees.
   Stacked denoising autoencoders are one type of
intermediate model, and they were my introduction to deep
learning in 2010. An autoencoder is a neural network that
passes its input through a middle layer before generating
output. It aims to reproduce its input from the encoded
form of the input in the middle layer.
    An autoencoder may seem like a silly thing to ﬁddle
with, but while learning to reproduce its input, the middle
layer typically learns something interesting about the
inputs that captures their essence without focusing on ﬁne,
trivial details. For example, if the inputs are the MNIST
digits, then the middle layer of an autoencoder learns about
digits as opposed to letters.
   A denoising autoencoder is similar, but we discard a
random fraction of the input values before pushing the
input through the middle layer. The autoencoder must still
learn to reproduce the entire input, but now it has a more
challenging task because the input is incomplete. This
process helps the autoencoder’s middle layer discover a
better encoding of the input.
   Finally, a stacked denoising autoencoder is a stack of
denoising autoencoders, wherein the output of the middle
layer of one becomes the input of the next. When arranged
this way, the stack learns a new representation of the input,
which often helps a classiﬁer appended to the top of the
stack to discriminate between classes. For example, in my
work at the time, the inputs were small pieces of an image
that may have contained a target of interest. Two or three
layers of trained stacked denoising autoencoders were used
to transform the inputs into a list of numbers that would
hopefully represent the input’s essence while ignoring the
image’s minutiae. The outputs were then used with a
support vector machine to decide if the input was a target.


2012 to 2021
Deep learning caught the world’s attention in 2012 when
AlexNet, a particular convolutional neural network
architecture, won the ImageNet challenge with an overall
error of just over 15 percent—far lower than any
competitor. The ImageNet challenge asks models to
identify the main subject of color images, whether a dog, a
cat, a lawnmower, and so on. In reality, “dog” isn’t a
sufﬁcient answer. The ImageNet dataset contains 1,000
classes of objects, including some 120 different dog breeds.
So, a correct answer would be “it’s a Border Collie” or “it’s
a Belgian Malinois.”
   Random guessing means randomly assigning a class
label to each image. In that case, we would expect an
overall success rate of 1 in 1,000, or an error rate of 99.9
percent. AlexNet’s error of 15 percent was truly impressive
—and that was in 2012. By 2017, convolutional neural
networks had reduced the error to about 3 percent, below
the approximate 5 percent achievable by the few humans
brave enough to do the challenge manually. Can you
discriminate between 120 different dog breeds? I certainly
can’t.
    AlexNet opened the ﬂoodgates. The new models broke
all previous records and began to accomplish what no one
had really expected from them: tasks like reimagining
images in the style of another image or painting, generating
a text description of the contents of an image along with
the activity shown, or playing video games as well as or
better than a human, among others.
    The ﬁeld was proliferating so quickly that it became
nearly impossible to keep up with each day’s deluge of new
papers. The only way to stay current was to attend multiple
conferences per year and review the new work appearing
on websites such as arXiv (https://www.arxiv.org), where
research in many ﬁelds is ﬁrst published. This led to the
creation of sites like https://www.arxiv-sanity-lite.com, which
ranks machine learning papers according to reader interest
in the hope that the “best” might become easier to ﬁnd.
   In 2014, another breakthrough appeared on the scene,
courtesy of researcher Ian Goodfellow’s insight during an
evening’s conversation with friends. The result was the
birth of generative adversarial networks (GANs), which Yann
LeCun called at the time the most signiﬁcant breakthrough
in neural networks in 20 to 30 years (overheard at NeurIPS
2016). GANs, which we’ll discuss in Chapter 6, opened a
new area of research that lets models “create” output that’s
related to but different from the data on which they were
trained. GANs led to the current explosion of generative AI,
including systems like ChatGPT and Stable Diffusion.
   Reinforcement learning is one of the three main branches
of machine learning, the other two being the supervised
learning we’ve been discussing and unsupervised learning,
which attempts to train models without labeled datasets. In
reinforcement learning, an agent (a model) is taught via a
reward function how to accomplish a task. The application
to robotics is obvious.
   Google’s DeepMind group introduced a deep
reinforcement learning–based system in 2013 that could
successfully learn to play Atari 2600 video games as well as
or better than human experts. (Who counts as an expert in
a then-35-year-old game system, I’m not sure.) The most
impressive part of the system, to me, was that the model’s
input was precisely the human’s input: an image of the
screen, nothing more. This meant the system had to learn
how to parse the input image and, from that, how to
respond by moving the joystick to win the game (virtually
—they used emulators).
   The gap between beating humans at primitive video
games and beating humans at abstract strategy games like
Go was, historically, deemed insurmountable. I was
explicitly taught in the late 1980s that the Minimax
algorithm used by systems like Deep Blue to win at chess
did not apply to a game like Go; therefore, no machine
would ever beat the best human Go players. My professors
were wrong, though they had every reason at the time to
believe their statement.
   In 2016, Google’s AlphaGo system beat Go champion
Lee Sedol in a ﬁve-game match, winning four to one. The
world took notice, further enhancing the growing
realization that a paradigm shift had occurred. By this time,
machine learning was already a commercial success.
However, AlphaGo’s victory was utterly impressive for
machine learning researchers and practitioners.
   Most of the general public didn’t notice that AlphaGo,
trained on thousands of human-played Go games, was
replaced in 2017 by AlphaGo Zero, a system trained
entirely from scratch by playing against itself, with no
human input given. In short order, AlphaGo Zero mastered
Go, even beating the original AlphaGo system (scoring a
perfect 100 wins and no losses).
   However, in 2022, the current state-of-the-art Go
system, KataGo, was repeatedly and easily defeated by a
system trained not to win but to reveal the brittleness
inherent in modern AI systems. The moves the adversarial
system used were outside the range encountered by
KataGo when it was trained. This is a real-world example
of how models are good at interpolating but bad at
extrapolating. When the adversarial system was trained not
to be better at Go but to exploit and “frustrate” the AI, it
was able to win better than three out of four games. I point
the reader to the Star Trek: The Next Generation episode
“Peak Performance,” where Data the android “wins” a
difﬁcult strategy game against a master not by attempting
to win but by attempting to match and frustrate.
   Deep learning’s penchant for beating humans at video
games continues. In place of primitive games like Atari’s,
deep reinforcement learning systems are now achieving
grandmaster-level performance at far more difﬁcult games.
In 2019, DeepMind’s AlphaStar system outperformed 99.8
percent of human players in StarCraft II, a strategy game
requiring the development of units and a plan of battle.
   The 1975 Asilomar Conference on Recombinant DNA
was an important milestone in recognizing biotechnology’s
growth and potential ethical issues. The conference
positively impacted future research, and that year its
organizers published a summary paper outlining an ethical
approach to biotechnology. The potential hazards of a ﬁeld
that was then primarily in its infancy were recognized early,
and action was taken to ensure ethical issues were
paramount when contemplating future research.
    The 2017 Asilomar Conference on Beneﬁcial AI
intentionally mirrored the earlier conference to raise
awareness of the potential hazards associated with AI. It is
now common to encounter conference sessions with titles
like “AI for Good.” The 2017 Asilomar conference resulted
in the development of a set of principles to guide the
growth and application of artiﬁcial intelligence. Similarly,
as of 2023, the US government—speciﬁcally, the White
House Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy—has
developed a “Blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights” meant to
protect the American public from the harmful effects of AI
indiscriminately applied. Indeed, White House ofﬁcials
have taken pains to address the AI community directly to
encourage proper consideration in developing even more
powerful AI systems. All of this is a good sign, but history
teaches that human law often lags behind technological
development, so the ultimate effectiveness of these
necessary attempts at framing the ﬁeld remains to be seen.
2021 to Now
The COVID-19 pandemic of 2020 brought most of the
world to a standstill. However, the AI community was only
minimally impacted by the pandemic, likely because remote
collaboration and conferences work rather well in this ﬁeld.
In addition, we can access powerful computers over the
internet, so physical proximity doesn’t limit research as it
might in other disciplines where access to the hardware is
necessary.
    Beginning in 2021 and continuing as I write, an
explosion of new models have appeared, each more
impressive than the last. Most can accept text input written
by humans to produce text, images, or even video output.
Often, the input marries text and example imagery to guide
the system. Current popular (and concerning) systems
include DALL-E 2, Stable Diffusion, Midjourney, and
ChatGPT, among others. Most large tech companies have
also demonstrated cutting-edge techniques that generate
video, audio, and even 3D models. The current buzz
generated by these systems is reminiscent of the excitement
in 2012, when deep learning proved its worth with
AlexNet. It’s another paradigm shift; but, to be clear, none
of these systems are conscious. I’m not alone in this
opinion. Even ChatGPT agrees with me. I asked it: “Are
you a conscious being?” Here’s its reply, verbatim:
     As a machine learning model, I am not a conscious being. I am a
     computer program that has been trained to generate text based on
     input from a user. I do not have the ability to think, reason, or
     experience consciousness in the same way that humans do. I am
     designed to provide information and assist users, but I do not have
     any independent thought or consciousness.

   I think Ada Lovelace would be satisﬁed with this answer,
though she might be puzzled about how an unthinking
machine could generate it. Note, however, that ChatGPT
didn’t claim not to think, only that it doesn’t think like
humans do. We’ll explore image synthesis in Chapter 6 and
large language models like ChatGPT in Chapter 7.
Perhaps then we’ll ﬁnd a resolution to her (assumed)
confusion.
                              ****
   So, why now? The short answer is the fall of symbolic
AI and the rise of technological innovations highly
favorable to the connectionist approach.
   Symbolic AI and connectionism emerged together, with
symbolic AI dominating for decades and forcing
connectionism into the background. But after two AI
winters that left symbolic AI barely breathing,
connectionism, assisted by key technological innovations,
has risen to ﬁll the void.
   I think of the relationship between symbolic AI and
connectionism as akin to that between non-avian dinosaurs
and mammals. Dinosaurs and mammals emerged at
roughly the same time, geologically speaking, but large,
terrestrial dinosaurs dominated the world for about 160
million years, forcing mammals to eke out an existence in
the shadows. When the asteroid hit 66 million years ago,
the large dinosaurs were wiped out, allowing the mammals
to evolve and take over.
    Of course, analogies ultimately break down. The
dinosaurs didn’t die out completely—we now call them
birds—and they didn’t go extinct because they were
somehow inferior. In fact, the dinosaurs are one of Earth’s
greatest success stories. Non-avian dinosaurs died because
of plain old bad luck. It was, almost literally, a disaster that
did them in (“disaster” from the Italian disastro, meaning
“ill star”).
   Might symbolic AI reemerge? It’s likely in some form,
but in cooperation with connectionism. Symbolic AI
promised that intelligent behavior was possible in the
abstract, and it didn’t deliver. Connectionism claims that
intelligent behavior can emerge from a collection of
simpler units. Deep learning’s successes support this view,
to say nothing of the billions of living brains currently on
the planet. But, as ChatGPT pointed out, existing
connectionist models “do not think, reason, or experience
consciousness in the same way that humans do.” Modern
neural networks are not minds; they are representation-
learning data processors. I’ll clarify what that means in
Chapter 5.
   Though our species, Homo sapiens, relies critically on
symbolic thought, it isn’t a requirement for intelligence. In
his book Understanding Human Evolution (Cambridge
University Press, 2022), anthropologist Ian Tattersall
claims it was unlikely that Neanderthals used symbolic
thought as we do, nor did they have language as we do, but
that they were nonetheless intelligent. Indeed, the
Neanderthals were sufﬁciently human for our ancestors to
“make love, not war” with them more than once—the
DNA of people of non-African ancestry testiﬁes to this fact.
   I expect a synergy between connectionism and symbolic
AI in the near future. For example, because a system like
ChatGPT is, in the end, only predicting the next output
token (word or part of a word), it can’t know when it’s
saying something wrong. An associated symbolic system
could detect faulty reasoning in the response and correct it.
How such a system might be implemented, I don’t know.
                            ****
   Hints of what might emerge from connectionism were
evident by the early 1960s. So, was it only symbolic AI bias
that delayed the revolution for so many decades? No.
Connectionism stalled because of speed, algorithm, and
data issues. Let’s examine each in turn.


Speed
To understand why speed stalled the growth of
connectionism, we need to understand how computers
work. Taking great liberties allows us to think of computers
as memory, which holds data (numbers) and a processing
unit, typically known as the central processing unit (CPU).
A microprocessor—like the one in your desktop computer,
smartphone, voice-controlled assistant, car, microwave, and
virtually everything else you use that isn’t a toaster (oh, and
in many toasters too)—is a CPU. Think of a CPU as a
traditional computer: data comes into the CPU from
memory or input devices like a keyboard or mouse, gets
processed, then is sent out of the CPU to memory or an
output device like a monitor or hard drive.
    Graphics processing units (GPUs), on the other hand,
were developed for displays, primarily for the video game
industry, to enable fast graphics. GPUs can perform the
same operation, such as “multiply by 2,” on hundreds or
thousands of memory locations (read: pixels)
simultaneously. If a CPU wants to multiply a thousand
memory locations by 2, it must multiply the ﬁrst, second,
third, and so on sequentially. As it happens, the primary
operation needed to train and implement a neural network
is ideally suited to what a GPU can do. GPU makers, like
NVIDIA, realized this early and began developing GPUs
for deep learning. Think of a GPU as a supercomputer on
a card that ﬁts in your PC.
   In 1945, the Electronic Numerical Integrator and
Computer (ENIAC) was state-of-the-art. ENIAC’s speed
was estimated to be around 0.00289 million instructions
per second (MIPS). In other words, ENIAC could perform
just under 3,000 instructions in one second. In 1980, a
stock 6502 8-bit microprocessor like the ones in most then-
popular personal computers ran at about 0.43 MIPS, or
some 500,000 instructions per second. In 2023, the already
somewhat outdated Intel i7-4790 CPU in the computer I’m
using to write this book runs at about 130,000 MIPS,
making my PC some 300,000 times faster than the 6502
from 1980 and about 45 million times faster than ENIAC.
   However, NVIDIA’s A100 GPU, when used for deep
learning, is capable of 312 teraﬂops (TFLOPS), or
312,000,000 MIPS: 730 million times faster than the 6502
and an unbelievable 110 billion times faster than ENIAC.
The increase in computational power over the timespan of
machine learning boggles the mind. Moreover, training a
large neural network on an enormous dataset often requires
dozens to hundreds of such GPUs.
Conclusion: Computers were, until the advent of fast GPUs, too
slow to train neural networks with the capacity needed to build
something like ChatGPT.

Algorithm
As you’ll learn in Chapter 4, we construct neural networks
from basic units that perform a simple task: collect input
values, multiply each by a weight value, sum, add a bias
value, and pass the result to an activation function to create
an output value. In other words, many input numbers
become one output number. The collective behavior
emerging from thousands to millions of such units leading
to billions of weight values lets deep learning systems do
what they do.
   The structure of a neural network is one thing;
conditioning the neural network to the desired task is
another. Think of the network’s structure, known as its
architecture, as anatomy. In anatomy, we’re interested in
what constitutes the body: this is the heart, that’s the liver,
and so on. Training a network is more like physiology: how
does one part work with another? The anatomy
(architecture) was there, but the physiology (training
process) was incompletely understood. That changed over
the decades, courtesy of key algorithmic innovations:
backpropagation, network initialization, activation
functions, dropout and normalization, and advanced
gradient descent algorithms. It’s not essential to understand
the terms in detail, only to know that improvements in
what these terms represent—along with the already
mentioned improvements in processing speed, combined
with improved datasets (discussion coming up)—were
primary enablers of the deep learning revolution.
   While it was long known that the right weight and bias
values would adapt a network to the desired task, what was
missing for decades was an efﬁcient way to ﬁnd those
values. The 1980s’ introduction of the backpropagation
algorithm, combined with stochastic gradient descent,
began to change this.
    Training iteratively locates the ﬁnal set of weight and
bias values according to the model’s errors on the training
data. Iterative processes repeat from an initial state, some
initial set of weights and biases. However, what should
those initial weights and biases be? For a long time, it was
assumed that the initial weights and biases didn’t matter
much; just select small numbers at random over some
range. This approach often worked, but many times it
didn’t, causing the network not to learn well, if at all. A
more principled approach to initializing networks was
required.
   Modern networks are still initialized randomly, but the
random values depend on the network’s architecture and
the type of activation function used. Paying attention to
these details allowed networks to learn better. Initialization
matters.
   We arrange neural networks in layers, where the output
of one layer becomes the input of the next. The activation
function assigned to each node in the network determines
the node’s output value. Historically, the activation function
was either a sigmoid or a hyperbolic tangent, both of which
produce an S-shaped curve when graphed. These functions
are, in most cases, inappropriate, and were eventually
replaced by a function with a long name that belies its
simplicity: the rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU). A ReLU asks a
simple question: is the input less than zero? If so, the
output is zero; otherwise, the output is the input value. Not
only are ReLU activation functions better than the older
functions, but computers can ask and answer that question
virtually instantaneously. Switching to ReLUs was,
therefore, a double win: improved network performance
and speed.
   Dropout and batch normalization are advanced training
approaches that are somewhat difﬁcult to describe at the
level we care to know about them. Introduced in 2012,
dropout randomly sets parts of the output of a layer of nodes
to zero when training. The effect is like training thousands
of models simultaneously, each independent but also linked.
Dropout, when appropriate, has a dramatic impact on
network learning. As a prominent computer scientist told
me at the time, “If we had had dropout in the 1980s, this
would be a different world now.”
   Batch normalization adjusts the data moving between
layers as it ﬂows through the network. Inputs appear on
one side of the network and ﬂow through layers to get to
the output. Schematically, this is usually presented as a left-
to-right motion. Normalization is inserted between the
layers to change the values to keep them within a
meaningful range. Batch normalization was the ﬁrst
learnable normalization technique, meaning it learned what
it should do as the network learned. An entire suite of
normalization approaches evolved from batch
normalization.
   The last critical algorithmic innovation enabling the
deep learning revolution involves gradient descent, which
works with backpropagation to facilitate learning the
weights and biases. The idea behind gradient descent is far
older than machine learning, but the versions developed in
the last decade or so have contributed much to deep
learning’s success. We’ll learn more about this subject in
Chapter 4.
Conclusion: The ﬁrst approaches to training neural networks were
primitive and unable to take advantage of their true potential.
Algorithmic innovations changed that.
Data
Neural networks require lots of training data. When people
ask me how much data is necessary to train a particular
model for a speciﬁc task, my answer is always the same: all
of it. Models learn from data; the more, the better because
more data means an improved representation of what the
model will encounter when used.
    Before the World Wide Web, collecting, labeling, and
processing datasets of the magnitude necessary to train a
deep neural network proved difﬁcult. This changed in the
late 1990s and the early 2000s with the tremendous growth
of the web and the explosion of data it represented.
   For example, Statista (https://www.statista.com) claims
that in 2022, 500 hours of new video were uploaded to
YouTube every minute. It’s also estimated that approximately
16 million people were using the web in December 1995,
representing 0.4 percent of the world’s population. By July
2022, that number had grown to nearly 5.5 billion, or 69
percent. Social media use, e-commerce, and simply moving
from place to place while carrying a smartphone are
enough to generate staggering amounts of data—all of
which is captured and used for AI. Social media is free
because we, and the data we generate, are the product.
   A phrase I often hear in my work is “we used to be data-
starved, but now we’re drowning in data.” Without large
datasets and enough labels to go with them, deep learning
cannot learn. But, on the other hand, with large datasets,
awe-inspiring things can happen.
Conclusion: In machine learning, data is everything.
                              ****
   The main takeaways from this chapter are:

     The symbolic AI versus connectionist feud appeared
     early and led to decades of symbolic AI dominance.
    Connectionism suffered for a long time because of
    speed, algorithm, and data issues.
    With the deep learning revolution of 2012, the
    connectionists have won, for now.
    The direct causes of the deep learning revolution were
    faster computers, the advent of graphics processing
    units, improved algorithms, and huge datasets.

   With this historical background complete enough for
our purposes, let’s return to machine learning, starting with
the classical algorithms.
