                                       9
   DATA FLOW IN NEURAL NETWORKS




In this chapter, I’ll present how data flows through a trained neural network. In
other words, we’ll look at how to go from an input vector or tensor to the output,
and the form the data takes along the way. If you’re already familiar with how
neural networks function, great, but if not, walking through how data flows from
layer to layer will help you build an understanding of the processes involved.
    First, we’ll look at how we represent data in two different kinds of networks.
Then, we’ll work through a traditional feedforward network to give ourselves a
solid foundation. We’ll see just how compact inference with a neural network
can be in terms of code. Finally, we’ll follow data through a convolutional
neural network by introducing convolutional and pooling layers. The goal of this
chapter isn’t to present how popular toolkits pass data around. The toolkits are
highly optimized pieces of software, and such low-level knowledge isn’t helpful
to us at this stage. Instead, the goal is to help you see how the data flows from
input to output.


Representing Data
In the end, everything in deep learning is about data. We have data that we’re
using to create a model, which we test with more data, ultimately letting us make
predictions about even more data. We’ll start by looking at how we represent
data in two types of neural networks: traditional neural networks and deep
convolutional networks.

Traditional Neural Networks
Traditional Neural Networks
For a traditional neural network or other classical machine learning models, the
input is a vector of numbers, the feature vector. The training data is a collection
of these vectors, each with an associated label. (We’ll restrict ourselves to basic
supervised learning in this chapter.) A collection of feature vectors is
conveniently implemented as a matrix, where each row is a feature vector and
the number of rows matches the number of samples in the dataset. As we now
know, a computer conveniently represents a matrix using a 2D array. Therefore,
when working with traditional neural networks or other classical models
(support vector machines, random forests, and so on), we’ll represent datasets as
2D arrays.
    For example, the iris dataset, which we first encountered in Chapter 6, has
four features in each feature vector. We represented it as a matrix:

>>> import numpy as np
>>> from sklearn import datasets
>>> iris = datasets.load_iris()
>>> X = iris.data[:5]
>>> X
array([[5.1, 3.5, 1.4, 0.2],
    [4.9, 3. , 1.4, 0.2],
    [4.7, 3.2, 1.3, 0.2],
    [4.6, 3.1, 1.5, 0.2],
    [5. , 3.6, 1.4, 0.2]])
>>> Y = iris.target[:5]

Here, we’ve shown the first five samples as we did in Chapter 6. The samples
above are all for class 0 (I. setosa). To pass this knowledge to the model, we
need a matching vector of class labels; X[i] returns the feature vector for sample i,
and Y[i] returns the class label. The class label is usually an integer and counts up
from zero for each class in the dataset. Some toolkits prefer one-hot-encoded
class labels, but we can easily create them from the more standard integer labels.
    Therefore, a traditional dataset uses matrices between layers to hold weights,
with the input and output of each layer a vector. This is straightforward enough.
What about a more modern, deep network?

Deep Convolutional Networks
Deep networks might use feature vectors, especially if the model implements 1D
convolutions, but more often than not, the entire point of using a deep network is
to allow convolutional layers to take advantage of spatial relationships in the
data. Usually, this means the inputs are images, which we represent using 2D
arrays. But the input doesn’t always need to be an image. The model is blissfully
unaware of what the input represents; only the model designer knows, and they
decide the architecture based on that knowledge. For simplicity, we’ll assume
the inputs are images, since we’re already aware of how computers work with
images, at least at a high level.
     A black-and-white image, or one with shades of gray, known as a grayscale
image, uses a single number to represent each pixel’s intensity. Therefore, a
grayscale image consists of a single matrix represented in the computer as a 2D
array. However, most of the images we see on our computers are color images,
not grayscale. Most software represents a pixel’s color by three numbers: the
amount of red, the amount of green, and the amount of blue. This is the origin of
the RGB label given to color images on a computer. There are many other ways
of representing colors, but RGB is by far the most common. The blending of
these primary colors allows computers to display millions of colors. If each pixel
needs three numbers, then a color image isn’t a single 2D array, but three 2D
arrays, one for each color.
     For example, in Chapter 4, we loaded a color image from sklearn. Let’s look at
it again to see how it’s arranged in memory:
>>> from sklearn.datasets import load_sample_image
>>> china = load_sample_image('china.jpg')
>>> china.shape
(427, 640, 3)

The image is returned as a NumPy array. Asking for the shape of the array
returns a tuple: (427, 640, 3). The array has three dimensions. The first is the
height of the image, 427 pixels. The second is the width of the image, 640
pixels. The third is the number of bands or channels, here three because it’s an
RGB image. The first channel is the red component of the color of each pixel,
the second the green, and the last the blue. We can look at each channel as a
grayscale image if we want:
>>> from PIL import Image
>>> Image.fromarray(china).show()
>>> Image.fromarray(china[:,:,0]).show()
>>> Image.fromarray(china[:,:,1]).show()
>>> Image.fromarray(china[:,:,2]).show()

PIL refers to Pillow, Python’s library for working with images. If you don’t
already have it installed, this will install it for you:

pip3 install pillow
pip3 install pillow

    Each image looks similar, but if you place them side by side, you’ll notice
differences. See Figure 9-1. The net effect of each per-channel image creates the
actual color displayed. Replace china[:,:,0] with just china to see the full color
image.




Figure 9-1: The red (left), green (middle), and blue (right) china image channels

    Inputs to deep networks are often multidimensional. If the input’s a color
image, we need to use a 3D tensor to contain the image. We’re not quite done,
however. Each input sample to the model is a 3D tensor, but we seldom work
with a single sample at a time. When training a deep network, we use
minibatches, sets of samples processed together to get an average loss. This
implies yet another dimension to the input tensor, one that lets us specify which
member of the minibatch we want. Therefore, the input is a 4D tensor: N × H ×
W × C, with N being the number of samples in the minibatch, H the height of
each image in the minibatch, W the width of each image, and C the number of
channels. We’ll sometimes write this in tuple form as (N, H, W, C).
    Let’s take a look at some actual data meant for a deep network. The data is
the CIFAR-10 dataset. It’s a widely used benchmark dataset and is available
here: https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/cifar.html. You don’t need to download
the raw dataset, however. We’ve included NumPy versions with the code for this
book. As mentioned above, we need two arrays: one for the images and the other
for the associated labels. You’ll find them in the cifar10_test_images.npy and
cifar10_test_labels.npy files, respectively. Let’s take a look:
>>> images = np.load("cifar10_test_images.npy")
>>> labels = np.load("cifar10_test_labels.npy")
>>> images.shape
(10000, 32, 32, 3)
>>> labels.shape
(10000,)

     Notice that the images array has four dimensions. The first is the number of
images in the array (N = 10,000). The second and third tell us that the images are
32×32 pixels. The last tells us that there are three channels, implying the dataset
consists of color images. Note that, in general, the number of channels might
refer to any collection of data grouped that way—it need not be an actual image.
The labels vector has 10,000 elements as well. These are the class labels, of which
there are 10 classes, a mix of animals and vehicles. For example,

>>> labels[123]
2
>>> Image.fromarray(images[123]).show()

This indicates that image 123 is of class 2 (bird) and that the label is correct; the
image displayed should be that of a bird. Recall that, in NumPy, asking for a
single index returns the entire subarray, so images[123] is equivalent to
images[123,:,:,:]. The fromarray method of the Image class converts a NumPy array to
an image so show can display it.
    Working with minibatches means we pass a subset of the entire dataset
through the model. If our model uses minibatches of 24, then the input to the
deep network, if using CIFAR-10, is a (24, 32, 32, 3) array: 24 images, each of
which has 32 rows, 32 columns, and 3 channels. We’ll see below that the idea of
channels is not restricted to the input to a deep network; it also applies to the
shape of the data passed between layers.
    We’ll return to data for deep networks shortly. But for now, let’s switch
gears to the more straightforward topic of dataflow in a traditional, feedforward
neural network.


Data Flow in Traditional Neural Networks
As we indicated above, in a traditional neural network, the weights between
layers are stored as matrices. If layer i has n nodes and layer i − 1 has m outputs,
then the weight matrix between the two layers, Wi, is an n × m matrix. When this
matrix is multiplied on the right by the m × 1 column vector of outputs from
layer i − 1, the result is an n × 1 output representing the input to the n nodes for
layer i. Specifically, we calculate

                                   ai = σ(Wiai−1 + bi)

where ai−1, the m × 1 vector of outputs from layer i − 1, multiplies Wi to produce
an n × 1 column vector. We add bi, the bias values for layer i, to this vector and
apply the activation function, σ, to every element of the resulting vector, Wiai−1
+ bi, to produce ai, the activations for layer i. We feed the activations to layer i +
1 as the output of layer i. By using matrices and vectors, the rules of matrix
multiplication automatically calculate all the necessary products without explicit
loops in the code.
     Let’s see an example with a simple neural network. We’ll generate a random
dataset with two features and then split this dataset into train and test groups.
We’ll use sklearn to train a simple feedforward neural network on the training set.
The network has a single hidden layer with five nodes and uses a rectified linear
activation function (ReLU). We’ll then test the trained network to see how well
it learned and, most importantly, look at the actual weight matrices and bias
vectors.
     To build the dataset, we’ll select a set of points in 2D space that are clustered
but slightly overlapping. We want the network to have to learn something that
isn’t completely trivial. Here is the code:

 from sklearn.neural_network import MLPClassifier

 np.random.seed(8675309)
❶ x0 = np.random.random(50)-0.3
 y0 = np.random.random(50)+0.3
 x1 = np.random.random(50)+0.3
 y1 = np.random.random(50)-0.3
 x = np.zeros((100,2))
 x[:50,0] = x0; x[:50,1] = y0
 x[50:,0] = x1; x[50:,1] = y1
❷ y = np.array([0]*50+[1]*50)

❸ idx = np.argsort(np.random.random(100))
 x = x[idx]; y = y[idx]
 x_train = x[:75]; x_test = x[75:]
 y_train = y[:75]; y_test = y[75:]

    We need the MLPClassifier class from sklearn, so we load it first. We then define
a 2D dataset, x, consisting of two clouds of 50 points each. The points are
randomly distributed (x0, y0 and x1, y1) but centered at (0.2, 0.8) and (0.8, 0.2),
respectively ❶. Note, we set the NumPy random number seed to a fixed value,
so each run produces the same set of numbers we’ll see below. Feel free to
remove this line and experiment with how well the network trains for various
generations of the dataset.
    We know the first 50 points in x are from what we’ll call class 0, and the next
50 points are class 1, so we define a label vector, y ❷. Finally, we randomize the
order of the points in x ❸, being careful to alter the labels in the same way, and
we split them into a training set (x_train) and labels (y_train) and a test set (x_test)
and labels (y_test). We keep 75 percent of the data for training and leave the
remaining 25 percent for testing.
    Figure 9-2 shows a plot of the full dataset, with each feature on one of the
axes. The circles correspond to class 0 instances and the squares to class 1
instances. There is clear overlap between the two classes.




Figure 9-2: The dataset used to train the neural network, with the class 0 instances shown as circles and
the class 1 instances as squares

   We’re now ready to train the model. The sklearn toolkit makes it easy for us, if
we use the defaults:

❶ clf = MLPClassifier(hidden_layer_sizes=(5,))
 clf.fit(x_train, y_train)

❷ score = clf.score(x_test, y_test)
 print("Model accuracy on test set: %0.4f" % score)

❸ W0 = clf.coefs_[0].T
 b0 = clf.intercepts_[0].reshape((5,1))
 W1 = clf.coefs_[1].T
 b1 = clf.intercepts_[1]

      Training involves creating an instance of the model class ❶. Notice that by
using the defaults, which include using a ReLU activation function, we only
need to specify the number of nodes in the hidden layers. We want one hidden
layer with five nodes, so we pass in the tuple (5,). Training is a single call to the
fit function passing in the training data, x_train, and the associated labels, y_train.
When complete, we test the model by computing the accuracy (score) on the test
set (x_test, y_test) and display the result.
Neural networks are initialized randomly, but because we fixed the NumPy
random number seed when we generated the dataset, and because sklearn uses the
NumPy random number generator as well, the outcome of training the network
should be the same for each run of the code. The model has an accuracy of 92
percent on the test data ❷. This is convenient for us but concerning as well—so
many toolkits use NumPy under the hood that interactions due to fixing the
random number seed are probable, usually undesirable, and perhaps challenging
to detect.
      We’re now finally ready to get the weight matrices and bias vectors from the
trained network ❸. Because sklearn uses np.dot for matrix multiplication, we take
the transpose of the weight matrices, W0 and W1, to get them in a form that’s
easier to follow mathematically. We’ll see precisely why this is necessary below.
Likewise, b0, the bias vector for the hidden layer, is a 1D NumPy array, so we
change it to a column vector. The output layer bias, b1, is a scalar, as there is
only one output for this network, the value we pass to the sigmoid function to get
the probability of class 1 membership.
      Let’s walk through the network for the first test sample. To save space, we’ll
only show the first three digits of the numeric values, but our calculations will
use full precision. The input to the network is




We want the network to give us an output leading to the likelihood of this input
belonging to class 1.
belonging to class 1.
    To get the output of the hidden layer, we multiply x by the weight matrix,
W0, add the bias vector, b0, and pass that result through the ReLU:




    The hidden layer to output transition uses the same form, with a0 in place of
x, but here, there is no ReLU applied:




    To get the final output probability, we use a1, a scalar value, as the argument
to the sigmoid function, also called the logistic function:
This means the network has assigned a 35.5 percent likelihood of the input value
being a member of class 1. The usual threshold for class assignment for a binary
model is 50 percent, so the network would assign x to class 0. A peek at y_test[0]
tells us the network is correct in this case: x is from class 0.


Data Flow in Convolutional Neural Networks
We saw above how data flow through a traditional neural network was
straightforward matrix-vector math. To track data flow through a convolutional
neural network (CNN), we need to learn first what the convolution operation is
and how it works. Specifically, we’ll learn how to pass data through
convolutional and pooling layers to a fully connected layer at the top of the
model. This sequence accounts for many CNN architectures, at least at a
conceptual level.

Convolution
Convolution involves two functions and the sliding of one over the other. If the
functions are f(x) and g(x), convolution is defined as




    Fortunately for us, we’re working in a discrete domain and more often than
not with 2D inputs, so the integral is not actually used, though * is still a useful
notation for the operation.
    The net effect of Equation 9.1 is to slide g(x) over f(x) for different shifts.
Let’s clarify using a 1D, discrete example.

Convolution in One Dimension
Figure 9-3 shows a plot on the bottom and two sets of numbers labeled f and g
on the top.
Figure 9-3: A 1D, discrete convolution

     Let’s start with the numbers shown at the top of Figure 9-3. The first row
lists the discrete values of f. Below that is g, a three-element linear ramp.
Convolution aligns g with the left edge of f as shown. We multiply
corresponding elements between the two arrays,

                             [2, 6, 15] × [−1, 0, 1] = [−2, 0, 15]

and then sum the resulting values,

                                         −2 + 0 + 15 = 13

to produce the value that goes in the indicated element of the output, f * g. To
complete the convolution, g slides one element to the right, and the process
repeats. Note that in Figure 9-3, we’re showing every other alignment of f and g
for clarity, so it’ll appear as though g is sliding two elements to the right. In
general, we refer to g as a kernel, the set of values that slide over the input, f.
    The plot on the bottom of Figure 9-3 is f(x) = ⌊255 exp(−0.5x2)⌋ for x in [−3,
3] at the points marked with circles. The floor operation makes the output an
integer to simplify the discussion below.
    The square points in Figure 9-3 are the output of the convolution of f(x) with
g(x) = [−1, 0, 1].
    The f and f * g points in Figure 9-3 are generated via

x = np.linspace(-3,3,20)
f = (255*np.exp(-0.5*x**2)).astype("int32")
g = np.array([-1,0,1])
fp= np.convolve(f,g[::-1], mode='same')

This code requires some explanation.
     First, we have x, a vector spanning [−3, 3] in 20 steps; this vector generates f
(f(x) above). We want f to be of integer type, which is what astype does for us.
Next, we define g, the small linear ramp. As we’ll see, the convolution operation
slides g over the elements of f to produce the output.
     The convolution operation comes next. As convolution is commonly used,
NumPy supplies a 1D convolution function, np.convolve. The first argument is f,
and the second is g. I’ll explain shortly why we added [::-1] to g to reverse it. I’ll
also explain the meaning of mode='same'. The output of the convolution is stored in
fp.
     The first position shown in the top part of Figure 9-3 fills in the 13 in the
output. Where does the 6 to the left of the 13 come from? Convolution has issues
at the edges of f, where the kernel does not entirely cover the input. For a three-
element kernel, there will be one edge element on each end of f. Kernels
typically have an odd number of values, so there is a clear middle element. If g
had five elements, there would be two elements on each end of f that g wouldn’t
cover.
    Convolution functions need to make a choice about these edge cases. One
option would be to return only the valid portion of the convolution, to ignore the
edge cases. If we had used this approach, called valid convolution, the output, yp,
would start with element 13 and be two less in length than the input, y.
    Another approach is to fill in missing values in f with zero. This is known as
zero padding, and we typically use it to make the output of a convolution
operation the same size as the input.
    Using mode='same' with np.convolve selects zero padding. This explains the 6 to
the left of the 13. It’s what we get when adding a zero before the 2 in f and
applying the kernel:

                   [0, 2, 6] × [−1, 0, 1] = [0, 0, 6], 0 + 0 + 6 = 6

If we wanted only the valid output values, we would have used mode='valid'
instead.
    The call to np.convolve above didn’t use g. We passed g[::-1] instead, the reverse
of g. We did this to make np.convolve act like the convolutions used in deep neural
networks. From a mathematical and signal processing perspective, convolution
uses the reverse of the kernel. The np.convolve function, therefore, reverses the
kernel, meaning we need to reverse it beforehand to get the effect we want. To
be technical, if we perform the operation we’ve called convolution without
flipping the kernel, we’re actually performing cross-correlation. This issue
seldom comes up in deep learning because we learn the kernel elements during
training—we don’t assign them ahead of time. With that in mind, any flipping of
the kernel by the toolkit process implementing the convolution operation won’t
affect the outcome, because the learned kernel values were learned with that flip
in place. We’ll assume going forward that there is no flip and, when necessary,
we’ll flip the kernels we give to NumPy and SciPy functions. Additionally, we’ll
continue to use the term convolution in this no-flip-of-the-kernel deep learning
sense.
    In general, convolution with discrete inputs involves placing the kernel over
the input starting on the left, multiplying matching elements, summing, and
putting the result in the output at the point where the center of the kernel
matches. The kernel then slides one element to the right, and the process repeats.
We can extend the discrete convolution operation to two dimensions. Most
We can extend the discrete convolution operation to two dimensions. Most
modern deep CNNs use 2D kernels, though it’s possible to use 1D and 3D
kernels as well.

Convolution in Two Dimensions
Convolution with a 2D kernel requires a 2D array. Images are 2D arrays of
values, and convolution is a common image processing operation. For example,
let’s load an image, the face of the raccoon we saw in Chapter 3, and alter it with
a 2D convolution. Consider the following:

from scipy.signal import convolve2d
from scipy.misc import face

img = face(True)
img = img[:512,(img.shape[1]-612):(img.shape[1]-100)]

k = np.array([[1,0,0],[0,-8,0],[0,0,3]])
c = convolve2d(img, k, mode='same')

Here, we’re using the SciPy convolve2d function from the signal module. First, we
load the raccoon image and subset it to a 512×512-pixel image of the raccoon’s
face (img). Next, we define a 3 × 3 kernel, k. Lastly, we convolve the kernel, as it
is, with the face image, storing the result in c. The mode='same' keyword zero pads
the image to handle the edge cases.
    The code above leads to

img[:8,:8]:
  [[ 88 97 112 127 116 97 84 84]
   [ 62 70 100 131 126 88 52 51]
   [ 41 46 87 127 146 116 78 56]
   [ 42 45 76 107 145 137 112 76]
   [ 58 59 69 79 111 106 90 68]
   [ 74 73 68 60 72 74 72 67]
   [ 92 87 75 63 57 74 91 93]
   [105 97 85 74 60 79 102 110]]

k:
     [[ 1 0 0]
      [ 0 -8 0]
      [ 0 0 3]]

c[1:8,1:8]:
  [[-209 -382 -566 -511 -278 -69 -101]
   [-106 -379 -571 -638 -438 -284 -241]
   [-168 -391 -484 -673 -568 -480 -318]
  [-278 -357 -332 -493 -341 -242 -143]
  [-335 -304 -216 -265 -168 -165 -184]
  [-389 -307 -240 -197 -274 -396 -427]
  [-404 -331 -289 -215 -368 -476 -488]]

Here, we’re showing the upper 8 × 8 corner of the image and the valid portion of
the convolution. Recall, the valid portion is the part where the kernel completely
covers the input array.
    For the kernel and the image, the first valid convolution output is −209.
Mathematically, the first step is element-wise multiplication with the kernel,




followed by a summation,

                   264 + 0 + 0 + 0 + (−560) + 0 + 0 + 0 + 87 = −209

Notice how the kernel used wasn’t k as we defined it. Instead, convolve2d flipped
the kernel top to bottom and then left to right before it was applied. The
remainder of c flows from moving the kernel one position to the right and
repeating the multiplication and addition. At the end of a row, the kernel moves
down one position and back to the left, until the entire image has been processed.
Deep learning toolkits refer to this motion as the stride, and it need not be one
position or equal in the horizontal and vertical directions.
    Figure 9-4 shows the effect of the convolution.
Figure 9-4: The original raccoon face image (left) and the convolution result (right)

     To make the image, c was shifted up, so the minimum value was zero, and
then divided by the maximum to map to [0, 1]. Finally, the output was multiplied
by 255 and displayed as a grayscale image. The original face image is on the
left. The convolved image is on the right. Convolution of the image with the
kernel has altered the image, emphasizing some features while suppressing
others.
     Convolving kernels with images isn’t merely an exercise to help us
understand the convolution operation. It’s of profound importance in the training
of CNNs. Conceptually, a CNN consists of two main parts: a set of convolution
and other layers taught to learn a new representation of the input, and a top-level
classifier taught to use the new representation to classify the inputs. It’s the joint
learning of the new representation and the classifier that makes CNNs so
powerful. The key to learning a new representation of the input is the set of
learned convolution kernels. How the kernels alter the input as data flows
through the CNN creates the new representation. Training with gradient descent
and backpropagation teaches the network which kernels to create.
     We’re now in a position to follow data through a CNN’s convolutional
layers. Let’s take a look.

Convolutional Layers
Above, we discussed how deep networks pass tensors from layer to layer and
how the tensor usually has four dimensions, N × H × W × C. To follow data
through a convolutional layer, we’ll ignore N, knowing that what we discuss is
applied to each sample in the tensor. This leaves us with inputs to the
convolutional layer that are H × W × C, a 3D tensor.
    The output of a convolutional layer is another 3D tensor. The height and
width of the output depend on the convolution kernels’ particulars and how we
decide to handle the edges. We’ll use valid convolution for the examples here,
meaning we’ll discard parts of the input that the kernel doesn’t wholly cover. If
the kernel is 3 × 3, the output will be two less in height and width, one less for
each edge. A 5 × 5 kernel loses four in height and width, two less for each edge.
    The convolutional layer uses sets of filters to accomplish its goal. A filter is a
stack of kernels. We need one filter for each of the desired output channels. The
number of kernels in the stack of each filter matches the number of channels in
the input. So, if the input has M channels, and we want N output channels using
K × K kernels, we need N filters, each of which is a stack of M K × K kernels.
    Additionally, we have a bias value for each of the N filters. We’ll see below
how the bias is used, but we now know how many parameters we need to learn
to implement a convolutional layer with M input channels, K × K kernels, and N
outputs. It’s K × K × M × N for N filters with K × K × M parameters each, plus N
bias terms—one per filter.
    Let’s make all of this concrete. We have a convolutional layer. The input to
the layer is an (H,W,C) = (5,5,2) tensor, meaning a height and width of five and
two channels. We’ll use a 3 × 3 kernel with valid convolution, so the output in
height and width is 3 × 3 from the 5 × 5 input. We get to select the number of
output channels. Let’s use three. Therefore, we need to use convolution and
kernels to map a (5,5,2) input to a (3,3,3) output. From what we discussed above,
we know we need three filters, and each filter has 3 × 3 × 2 parameters, plus a
bias term.
    Our input stack is
We’ve split the third dimension to show the two input channels, each 5 × 5.
  The three filters are




Again, we’ve separated the third dimension. Notice how each filter has two 3 × 3
kernels, one for each channel of the 5 × 5 × 2 input.
   Let’s work through applying the first filter, f0. We need to convolve the first
channel of the input with the first kernel of f0:




Then, we need to convolve the second input channel with the second kernel of f0:




Finally, we add the two convolution outputs along with the single bias scalar:
Finally, we add the two convolution outputs along with the single bias scalar:




We now have the first 3 × 3 output.
  Repeating the process above for f1 and f2 gives




We’ve completed the convolutional layer and generated the 3 × 3 × 3 output.
    Many toolkits make it easy to add operations in the call that sets up the
convolutional layer, but, conceptually, these are layers of their own that accept
the 3 × 3 × 3 output as an input. For example, if requested, Keras will apply a
ReLU to the output. Applying a ReLU, a nonlinearity, to the output of the
convolution would give us




Note that all elements less than zero are now zero. We use a nonlinearity
between convolutional layers for the same reason we use a nonlinear activation
function in a traditional neural network: to keep the convolutional layers from
collapsing into a single layer. Notice how the operation to generate the filter
outputs is purely linear; each output element is a linear combination of input
values. Adding the ReLU breaks this linearity.
    One reason for the creation of convolutional layers was to reduce the number
of learned parameters. For the example above, the input was 5 × 5 × 2 = 50
elements. The desired output was 3 × 3 × 3 = 27 elements. A fully connected
layer between these would need to learn 50 × 27 = 1,350 weights, plus another
27 bias values. However, the convolutional layer learned three filters, each with
3 × 3 × 2 weights, as well as three bias values, for a total of 3(3 × 3 × 2) + 3 = 57
parameters. Adding the convolutional layer saved learning some 1,300
additional weights.
    The output of a convolutional layer is often the input to a pooling layer. Let’s
consider that type of layer next.
Pooling Layers
Convolutional networks often use pooling layers after convolutional layers.
Their use is a bit controversial, as they discard information, and the loss of
information might make it harder for the network to learn spatial relationships.
Pooling is generally performed in the spatial domain along the input tensor’s
height and width while preserving the number of channels.
    The pooling operation is straightforward: you move a window over the
image, usually 2 × 2 with a stride of two, to group values. The specific pooling
operation performed on each group is either max or average. The max-pooling
operation preserves the maximum value in the window and discards the rest.
Average pooling takes the mean of the values in the window.
    A 2 × 2 window with a stride of two results in a reduction of a factor of two
in each spatial direction. Therefore, a (24,24,32) input tensor leads to a
(12,12,32) output tensor. Figure 9-5 illustrates the process for maximum pooling.




Figure 9-5: Max pooling with a 2 × 2 window and a stride of two

    One channel of the input, with a height and width of eight, is on the left. The
2 × 2 window slides over the input, jumping by two, so there is no overlap of
windows. The output for each 2 × 2 region of the input is the maximum value.
Average pooling would instead output the mean of the four numbers. As with
normal convolution, at the end of the row, the window slides down two
positions, and the process repeats to change the 8 × 8 input channel to a 4 × 4
output channel.
    As mentioned above, pooling without overlap in the windows loses spatial
information. This has caused some in the deep learning community, most
notably Geoffrey Hinton, to lament its use, as dropping spatial information
distorts the relationship between objects or parts of objects in the input. For
example, applying a 2 × 2 max pooling window with a stride of one instead of
two to the input matrix of Figure 9-5 produces




This is a 7 × 7 output, which only loses one row and column of the original 8 × 8
input. In this case, the input matrix was randomly generated, so we should
expect a max-pooling operation biased toward eights and nines—there is no
structure to capture. This is not usually the case in an actual CNN, of course, as
it’s the spatial structure inherent in the inputs we wish to utilize.
     Pooling is commonly used in deep learning, especially for CNNs, so it’s
essential to understand what a pooling operation is doing and be aware of its
potential pitfalls. Let’s move on now to the output end of a CNN, typically the
fully connected layers.

Fully Connected Layers
A fully connected layer in a deep network is, in terms of weights and data,
identical to a regular layer in a traditional neural network. Many deep networks
concerned with classification pass the output of a set of convolution and pooling
layers to the first fully connected layer via a layer that flattens the tensor,
essentially unraveling it into a vector. Once the output is a vector, the fully
connected layer uses a weight matrix in the same way a traditional neural
network does to map a vector input to a vector output.

Data Flow Through a Convolutional Neural Network
Let’s put all the pieces together to see how data flows through a CNN from input
to output. We’ll use a simple CNN trained on the MNIST dataset, a collection of
28×28-pixel grayscale images of handwritten digits. The architecture is shown
next.
Input → Conv(32) → Conv(64) → Pool → Flatten → Dense(128) → Dense(10)

The input is a 28×28-pixel grayscale image (one channel). The convolutional
layers (conv) use 3 × 3 kernels and valid convolution, so their output’s height
and width are two less than their input. The first convolutional layer learns 32
filters while the second learns 64. We’re ignoring layers that do not affect the
amount of data in the network, like the ReLU layers after the convolutional
layers. The max-pooling layer is assumed to use a 2 × 2 window with a stride of
two. The first fully connected layer (dense) has 128 nodes, followed by an
output layer of 10 nodes, one for each digit, 0 to 9.
     The tensors passed through this network for a single input sample are
(28,28,1) →(26,26,32) →(24,24,64) →(12,12,64) → 9216 → 128 → 10
 Input     Conv     Conv      Pool Flatten Dense Dense

The flatten layer unravels the (12,12,64) tensor to form a vector of 9,216
elements (12 × 12 × 64 = 9,216). We pass the 9,216 elements that the flatten
layer outputs through the first dense layer to generate 128 output values, and the
last step takes the 128-element vector and maps it to 10 output values.
    Note, the values above refer to the data passed through the network for each
input sample, one of the N samples in the minibatch. This is not the same as the
number parameters (weights and biases) the network needed to learn during
training.
    The network shown above was trained on the MNIST digits using Keras.
Figure 9-6 illustrates the action of the network for two inputs by showing,
visually, the output of each layer. Specifically, it shows each layer’s output for
two input images, depicting a 4 and a 6.
Figure 9-6: A visual representation of the output of a CNN for two sample inputs

     Starting at the top, we see the two inputs. For the figure, intensities have
been reversed, so darker represents higher numeric values. The input is a
(28,28,1) tensor, the 1 indicating a single-channel grayscale image. Valid
convolution with a 3 × 3 kernel returns a 26 × 26 output. The first convolutional
layer learned 32 filters, so the output is a (26,26,32) tensor. In the figure, we
show the output of each filter as an image. Zero is scaled to midlevel gray
(intensity 128), more positive values are darker, and more negative values are
lighter. We see differences in how the inputs have been affected by the learned
filters. The single input channel means each filter in this layer is a single 3 × 3
kernel. Transitions between light and dark indicate edges in particular
orientations.
     We pass the (26,26,32) tensor through a ReLU (not shown here) and then
through the second convolutional layer. The output of this layer is a (24,24,64)
tensor shown as an 8 × 8 grid of images in the figure. We can see many parts of
tensor shown as an 8 × 8 grid of images in the figure. We can see many parts of
the input digits highlighted.
    The pooling layer preserves the number of channels but reduces the spatial
dimension by two. In image form, the 8 × 8 grid of 24×24-pixel images is now
an 8 × 8 grid of 12×12-pixel images. The flatten operation maps the (12,12,64)
tensor to a 9,216-element vector.
    The output of the first dense layer is a vector of 128 numbers. For Figure 9-
6, we show this as a 128-element bar code. The values run from left to right. The
height of each bar is unimportant and was selected only to make the bar code
easy to see. The bar code generated from the input image is the final
representation that the top layer of 10 nodes uses to create the output passed
through the softmax function. The highest softmax output is used to select the
class label, “4” or “6.”
    Therefore, we can think of all the CNN layers through the first dense layer as
mapping inputs to a new representation, one that makes it easy for a simple
classifier to handle. Indeed, if we pass 10 examples of “4” and “6” digits through
this network and display the resulting 128-node feature vectors, we get Figure 9-
7, where we can easily see the difference between the digit patterns.
Figure 9-7: The first fully connected layer outputs for multiple “4” and “6” inputs

    Of course, the entire point of writing digits as we do is to make it easy for
humans to see the differences between them. While we could teach ourselves to
differentiate digits using the 128-element vector images, we naturally prefer to
use the written digits because of habitual use and the fact we already employ
highly sophisticated hierarchical feature detectors via our brain’s visual system.
    The example of a CNN learning a new input representation that’s more
conducive to interpretation by a machine is worth bearing in mind, since what a
human might use in an image as a clue to its classification is not necessarily
what a network learns to use. This might explain, in part, why certain
preprocessing steps, like the changes made to training samples during data
augmentation, are so effective in helping the network learn to generalize, when
many of those alterations seem strange to us.
Summary
The goal of this chapter was to demonstrate how neural networks manipulate
data from input to output. Naturally, we couldn’t cover all network types, but, in
general, the principles are the same: for traditional neural networks, data is
passed from layer to layer as a vector, and for deep networks, it’s passed as a
tensor, typically of four dimensions.
     We learned how to present data to a network, either as a feature vector or a
multidimensional input. We followed this by looking at how to pass data through
a traditional neural network. We saw how the vectors used as input to, and
output from, a layer made the implementation of a traditional neural network a
straightforward exercise in matrix-vector multiplication and addition.
     Next, we saw how a deep convolutional network passes data from layer to
layer. We learned first about the convolution operation and then about the
specifics of how convolutional and pooling layers manipulate data as tensors—a
3D tensor for each sample in the input minibatch. At the top of a CNN meant for
classification are fully connected layers, which we saw act precisely as they do
in a traditional neural network.
     We ended the chapter by showing, visually, how input images moved
through a CNN to produce an output representation, allowing the network to
label the inputs correctly. We briefly discussed what this process might mean in
terms of what a network picks up on during training and how that might differ
from what a human naturally sees in an image.
     We are now in a position to discuss backpropagation, the first of the two
critical algorithms that, together with gradient descent, make training deep
neural networks possible.
