                                        7
             DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS




The discovery of “the calculus” by Sir Issac Newton, and separately by Gottfried
Wilhelm Leibniz, was one of the greatest achievements in the history of
mathematics. Calculus is typically split into two main parts: differential and
integral. Differential calculus talks about rates of change and their relationships,
embodied in the notion of the derivative. Integral calculus is concerned with
things like the area under a curve.
    We don’t need integral calculus for deep learning, but we’ll use differential
calculus often. For example, we use differential calculus to train neural
networks; we adjust the weights of a neural network using gradient descent,
which relies on derivatives calculated via the backpropagation algorithm.
    The derivative will be the star of this chapter. We’ll begin by introducing the
idea of slope and seeing how it leads to the notion of a derivative. We’ll then
formally define the derivative and learn how to calculate derivatives of functions
of one variable. After that, we’ll learn how to use derivatives to find the minima
and maxima of functions. Next come partial derivatives, the derivatives with
respect to a single variable for functions of more than one variable. We’ll use
partial derivatives extensively in the backpropagation algorithm. We’ll conclude
with gradients, which will introduce us to matrix calculus, the subject of Chapter
8.


Slope
In algebra class, we learned all about lines. One way to define a line is the slope-
intercept form,
intercept form,

                                     y = mx + b

where m is the slope and b is the y intercept, the place where the line crosses the
y-axis. We’re interested in the slope. If we know two points on the line, (x1, y1)
and (x0, y0), we know the slope of the line:




    The slope tells us how much of a change in y we will get for any given
change in x position. If the slope is positive, then a positive change in x leads to
a positive change in y. On the other hand, a negative slope means that a positive
change in x leads to a negative change in y.
    The slope-intercept form of the line tells us that the slope is the
proportionality constant between x and y. The intercept, b, is a constant offset.
This means a change in x position from x1 to x0 leads to an m(x1 − x0) change in
y. Slopes relate two things, telling us how changing one affects the other. We’ll
get back to this idea several times in the book.
    Now, let’s visualize this with some examples. Figure 7-1 shows the plot of a
curve and some lines that intersect it.
Figure 7-1: A curve with a secant line (A) and a tangent line (B)

    The line labeled A crosses the curve at two points, x1 and x0. A line passing
between two points on a curve is called a secant line. The other line, B, just
touches the curve at the point xt. Lines that touch a curve at one point are called
tangent lines. We’ll get back to secant lines in the next section, but, for now,
notice that the tangent line has a particular slope at xt and that a secant line
becomes a tangent line as the distance between the points x1 and x0 goes toward
zero.
    Imagine that we move the point xt from place to place along the curve; we
can see that the slope of the tangent line at xt would change with it. As we
approach the minimum point of the curve, near x = 0.3, we see that the slope
becomes more and more shallow. If we approach from the left, the slope is
negative and becomes less and less negative. If we approach from the right, the
slope is positive but becomes smaller and smaller. At the actual minimum point,
near x = 0.3, the tangent line is horizontal, with a slope of zero. Similarly, if we
approach the maximum of the curve, near x = −0.8, the slope also approaches
zero.
    We can see that the tangent line tells us how the curve is changing at a point.
As we’ll see later in the chapter, the fact that the slope of a tangent line is zero at
the minima and maxima of a curve points us toward a method for finding these
points. The points where the slope of the tangent line is zero are known as
stationary points.
    Of course, to take advantage of the slope of the tangent line, we need to be
able to find its value for any x on the curve. The next section will show us how.


Derivatives
The previous section introduced the idea of secant and tangent lines and hinted
that knowing the slope of the tangent line at any point on a curve is a potentially
useful thing. The slope of the tangent line at a point x is known as the derivative
at x. It tells us how the curve (function) is changing at the point x, that is, how
the function value changes with an infinitesimal change in x. In this section,
we’ll formally define the derivative and learn shortcut rules for calculating
derivatives of functions of a single variable, x.

A Formal Definition
A typical first-semester calculus course introduces you to derivatives through
studying limits. I mentioned above how the slope of the secant line between two
points on a curve becomes a tangent line when the points collapse on top of each
other, and that’s one place where limits come into play.
    For example, if y = f(x) is a curve, and we have two points on the curve, x0
and x1, then the slope, Δy/Δx, between these points is




This is the rise over run you may remember learning in school. The rise, Δy = y1
− y0 = f(x1) − f(x0), is divided by the run, Δx = x1 − x0. We typically use Δ as a
prefix to mean the change in some variable.
    If we define h = x1 − x0, we can rewrite Equation 7.1 as
since x1 = x0 + h.
    In this new form, we can find the slope of the tangent line at x0 by letting h
get closer and closer to zero, h → 0. Letting a value approach another value is a
limit. Letting h → 0 moves the two points we’re calculating the slope between
closer and closer. This leads directly to the definition of the derivative



where dy/dx or f′(x) is used to represent the derivative of f(x).
    Before we get into what the derivative means, let’s take a minute to discuss
notation. Using f′(x) for the derivative follows Joseph-Louis Lagrange. Leibniz
used dy/dx to mirror the notation for slope with Δ → d. If Δy is a change in y
between two points, dy is the infinitesimal change in y at a single point. Newton
used yet another notation, , with the dot representing the derivative of f.
Physicists often use Newton’s notation for the specific case of derivatives with
respect to time. For example, if f(t) is the position of a particle as a function of
time, t, then      is the derivative with respect to t, that is, how the position is
changing in time. How a position changes in time is the speed (velocity if using
vectors). You’ll see all of these notations in books. My preference is to preserve
   for functions of time and use Lagrange’s f′(x) and Leibniz’s dy/dx
interchangeably elsewhere.
    Although Equation 7.2 above is quite tedious and the bane of many
beginning calculus students, at least until they hit integration, you could work
with it if you had to. However, we won’t discuss integration at all in this book,
so you can take a deep breath and relax.
    After the struggle with limits, calculus students are let in on a secret: a small
set of rules will allow you to calculate virtually all derivatives without using
limits. We’ll start by introducing these rules, one at a time with examples, and
then, at the end of this section, we’ll put them all together in a form suitable for a
T-shirt.
    However, before we dive into the rules, let’s spend a little more time
discussing what the derivative is telling us. Above, I mentioned that how a
position changes in time is given by the derivative. This is true of all derivatives;
they tell us how something is changing with respect to how something else is
changing. We even see this in Leibniz’s notation, dy/dx, how dy changes for a
change in dx. The derivative at x tells us how the function is changing at x. As
we’ll see, the derivative of f(x) is itself a new function of x. If we pick a specific
x0, then we know that f(x0) is the value of the function at x0.
     Similarly, if we know the derivative, then f′(x0) is how quickly, and in which
direction, the function, f(x), is changing at x0. Consider the definition of speed as
how the position changes with time. We even say it in words: my current speed
is 30 mph—miles per hour—a change in position with respect to a change in
time.
     We’ll use derivatives like rates and see how changing one thing affects
another. In the end, for deep learning, we want to know how changing the value
of a parameter in a network will ultimately change the loss function, the error
between what the network should have output and what it actually output.
     If f′(x) is a function of x, then we should be able to take the derivative of it.
We call f′(x) the first derivative. Its derivative, which we denote as f′′(x), is the
second derivative. In Leibniz’s notation, we write d2y/dx2. The second derivative
tells us how the first derivative is changing with respect to x. Physics helps here.
The first derivative of the position as a function of time (f) is the velocity, —
how the position is changing with time. Therefore, the second derivative of the
position, , which is the first derivative of the velocity, is how the velocity is
changing with time. We call this the acceleration.
     In theory, there is no end to how many derivatives we can calculate. In
reality, many functions ultimately end up with a derivative that is a constant
value. Since a constant value doesn’t change, its derivative is zero.
     To sum up, the derivative of f(x) is another function, f′(x) or dy/dx, that tells
us the slope of the line tangent to f(x) at every point. And, since f′(x) is a function
of x, it also has a derivative, f′′(x) or d2y/dx2, the second derivative, telling us
how f′(x) changes at each x, and so on. We’ll see below how to make use of first
and second derivatives. For now, let’s learn the rules of differentiation, the act of
calculating a derivative.

Basic Rules
We mentioned one rule in the previous section: that the derivative of a constant,
c, is zero. So, we write



where we’re using Leibniz’s notation in operator form: d/dx. Think of d/dx as
something operating on what follows; it does this the same way that negation
does: to negate c, we write −c; to differentiate c, we write . If our expression
has no x, then we will treat it as a constant, and the derivative will be zero.

The Power Rule
The derivative of a power of x uses the power rule,



where a is a constant and n is an exponent that doesn’t need to be an integer.
Let’s see some examples:




   We often build algebraic expressions out of terms that are added and
subtracted. Differentiation is a linear operator, so we can write



This means we calculate derivatives term by term. For example, with the set of
rules we have so far, we now know how to calculate the derivative of a
polynomial:
In general, then,




where we see that the derivative of a polynomial of degree n is another
polynomial of degree n − 1 and that any constant term in the original polynomial
drops to zero.

The Product Rule
Differentiation of functions multiplied together has its own rule, the product
rule:



The derivative of the product is the derivative of the first function times the
second plus the derivative of the second times the first. Consider the following
examples:
The Quotient Rule
The derivative of a function divided by another function follows the quotient
rule:




This leads to examples like these:




The Chain Rule
The next rule concerns the composition of functions. Two functions are
composed when the output of one is used as the input to another. The chain rule
applies to function compositions, and it’s of fundamental importance in the
training of neural networks. The rule is



We multiply the derivative of the outer function, using g(x) as the variable, by
the derivative of the inner function with respect to x.
    As a first example, consider the function f(x) = (x2 + 2x + 3)2. Is this the
composition of two functions? It is. Let’s define f(g) = g2 and g(x) = x2 + 2x + 3.
Then, we can find f(x) by replacing every instance of g in f(g) with the definition
of g in terms of x: g(x) = x2 + 2x + 3. This gives

                             f(x) = g2 = (x2 + 2x + 3)2

which is, naturally, what we started with. To find f′(x), we first find f′(g), the
derivative of f with respect to g, and then multiply by g′(x), the derivative of g
with respect to x. As a final step, we replace references to g with its definition in
terms of x. So, we calculate f′(x) as




     We typically don’t explicitly call out f(g) and g(x), but mentally we work
through the same process. Let’s see some more examples. In this one, we want
to find



   If we use the chain rule, we see that we have f(g) = 2g2 + 3 and g(x) = 4x − 5.
Therefore, we can write
where f′(g) = 2g and g′(x) = 4. With some practice, we’d mentally picture the 4x
− 5 of f(x) as its own variable (the substitution of g) and then remember to
multiply the derivative of 4x − 5 when done. What if we didn’t see the
composition? What if we expanded the entire function, f(x), and then took the
derivative? We’d better get the answer we found above by using the chain rule.
Let’s see . . .




This is what we found above, so our application of the chain rule is correct.
   Let’s look at another example. If             , how should we think of
calculating the derivative? If we look at the function as           , with u(x) =
                2
1 and v(x) = 3x , we can use the quotient rule and get the following.
Here, we used a shorthand notation with u and v that drops the formal function
of x notation.
    We can also picture f(x) as (3x2)−1. If we think of it this way, we can apply
the chain rule and power rule to get




proving that sometimes there’s more than one way to calculate a derivative.
    We presented the chain rule using Lagrange’s notation. Later in the chapter,
we’ll see it again using Leibniz’s notation. Let’s move on now and present a set
of rules for trigonometric functions.

Rules for Trigonometric Functions
The derivatives of the basic trigonometric functions are straightforward:
    We can see the last rule is correct if we apply the basic differentiation rules
to the definition of the tangent:




Remember that sec x = 1/ cos x and sin2 x + cos2 x = 1.
   Let’s look at some examples using the new trig rules. We’ll start with one
composing a function with a trig function:




   We can see that this is a composition of f(g) = sin(g) and g(x) = x3 − 3x, so
we know we can apply the chain rule to get the derivative as f′(g)g′(x) with f′(g)
= cos(g) and g′(x) = 3x2 − 3. The second line simplifies the answer.
   Let’s look at a more complicated composition:
This time, we break up the composition as f(g) = g2 and g(x) = sin(x3 − 3x).
However, g(x) is itself a composition of g(u) = sin(u) and u(x) = x3 − 3x, as we
had in the previous example. So, the first step is to write the following.




The first line is the definition of the derivative of a composition. The second line
substitutes the derivative of f(g), which is 2g, and the third line replaces g(x)
with sin(x3 − 3x). Now, we just need to find g′(x), which we can do by using the
chain rule a second time with g(u) = sin u and u(x) = x3 − 3x, as we did for the
example above. Doing this gives us g′(x) = cos(x3 − 3x)(3x2 − 3), so now we
know that f′(x) is




   Let’s do one more example. This one will involve more than one trig
function. We want to see how to calculate




    As is often the case when working with trig functions, identities come into
play. Here, we see that f(x) can be rewritten:
Now the derivative uses the trig rules, the definition of the secant, the chain rule,
and the product rule, as shown next.




   Let’s move on and look at derivatives of exponentials and logarithms.

Rules for Exponentials and Logarithms
The derivative of ex, where e is the base of the natural logarithm (e ≈ 2.718 . . .),
is particularly simple. It is itself:



   When the argument is a function of x, this becomes



If the derivative of ex is ex, what is the derivative of ax when a is a real number
other than e? To see the answer, we need to remember that ex and ln x, the
natural logarithm using base e, are inverse functions, so elna = a. Then, we can
write

                                ax = (eln a)x = exln a

We know how to find the derivative of exlna from Equation 7.3 above. It is



but e x ln a = ax, so we have



and, in general,



   Notice, if a = e, we have ln(e) = 1, and Equation 7.4 becomes Equation 7.3.
   Let’s look now at the derivative of the natural log itself. It is



   When the argument is a function of x, this becomes




    You may be wondering: How do we find the derivative of a logarithm that
uses a base other than e? For example, what is the derivative of log10 x? To
answer this question, we do something similar to what we did above for the
derivative of ax. We write the logarithm of x for some base, b, in terms of the
natural log, as



Here, ln b is a constant that does not depend on x. Also, we now know how to
find the derivative of ln x, so we see that the derivative of logb x must be



for any real number base b ≠ 1. And, still more generally,




where, again, we notice that if b = e, we get ln e = 1, and Equation 7.6 becomes
Equation 7.5.
    With Equation 7.6, we’ve reached the end of our rules for derivatives. Let’s
now put them together in a single table we can refer back to throughout the
remainder of the book. The result is Table 7-1.
    We know how to find derivatives now. I would encourage you to look for
practice sheets with worked-out answers to convince yourself that you
understand the rules and how to apply them. Let’s move on and look at how we
can use derivatives to find the minima and maxima of functions. Finding minima
is critical to the training of neural networks.
Table 7-1: The Rules of Differentiation

  Type                                    Rule
  Constants
  Powers
  Sums
  Products
  Quotients

  Chain
  Trigonometry




  Exponents
  Exponents




  Logarithms




Minima and Maxima of Functions
Earlier, I defined stationary points as places where the first derivative of a
function is zero, that is, places where the slope of the tangent line is zero. We
can use this information to decide if a particular point, call it xm, is a minimum
or maximum of the function, f(x). If xm is a minimum, it is a low point of the
function, where f(xm) is smaller than any point to the immediate left or right of f
(xm). Similarly, if f(xm) is higher than any point to the immediate left or right,
f(xm) is a maximum. We collectively refer to minima and maxima as extrema of
f(x) (singular, extremum).
     In terms of the derivative, a minimum is a place where the derivative of
points immediately to the left of xm are negative, and derivatives of points
directly to the right of xm are positive. Maxima are the reverse: derivatives to the
left are positive, and derivatives to the right of xm are negative.
    Look back at Figure 7-1. There, we have a local maximum at about x = −0.8
and a local minimum at about x = 0.3. Let’s say that the maximum is actually at
xm = −0.8. This is a maximum because if we look at any point xp in the vicinity
of xm, f(xp) is less than f(xm). Likewise, if the minimum is at xm = 0.3, that’s
because any point xp near it has f(xp) > f(xm). If we imagine the tangent line
sliding along the graph, as it approaches x = −0.8, we see that the slope is
positive but heading toward zero. If we move past x = −0.8, the slope is now
negative. The reverse is true for the minimum at x = 0.3. Tangent lines
approaching from the left have negative slope, but once they’re past x = 0.3, the
slope is positive.
    You’ll read and hear the terms global and local applied to minima and
maxima. The global minimum of f(x) is the lowest of all the minima of f(x), and
the global maximum is the highest of all the maxima. Other minima and
maxima, then, are considered local; they are effective over a particular region,
but there are other minima that are lower or maxima that are higher. We should
note that not all functions have minima or maxima. For example, a line, f(x) =
mx + b, has no minima or maxima, because there are no points on the line that
satisfy the requirements for either.
     So, if the first derivative, f′(x), is zero, we have a minimum or maximum,
right? Not so fast. At other stationary points, the first derivative may be zero, but
the remaining criteria for a minimum or maximum are not met. These points are
often called inflection points or, if in multiple dimensions, saddle points. For
example, consider y = x3. The first derivative is y′ = 3x2, and the second
derivative is y′′ = 6x. Both the first and second derivative are zero at x = 0.
However, as we can see in Figure 7-2, the slope is positive to both the immediate
left and immediate right of x = 0. Therefore, the slope never switches from
positive to negative or negative to positive, meaning x = 0 is not an extremum
but is an inflection point.




Figure 7-2: A graph of y = x3 showing an inflection point at x = 0

     Now assume that xs is a stationary point so that f′(xs) = 0. If we pick two
other points, xs−∊ and xs+∊, one just to the left of xs and the other just to the
right, for some very small ∊ (epsilon), we have four possibilities for the values
of f′(xs−∊) and f′(xs+∊), shown in Table 7-2.
Table 7-2: Identifying Stationary Points

  Sign of f’(xs – ∊), f’(xs + ∊)                   Type of stationary point at xs – ∊
                                                   < xs < xs + ∊
  +, –                                             Maximum
  –, +                                             Minimum
  +, +                                             Neither
  –, –                                             Neither

    Therefore, the value of the first derivative at a candidate stationary point
isn’t enough to tell us whether the point represents a minimum or maximum. We
can look at the region around the candidate point to help us decide. We can also
look at the value of f′′(x), the second derivative of f(x). If xs is a stationary point
where f′(xs) = 0, the sign of f′′(xs) can tell us about what type of stationary point
xs might be. If f′′(xs) < 0, then xs is a maximum of f(x). If f′′(xs) > 0, xs is a
minimum. If f′′(xs) = 0, the second derivative isn’t helpful; we will need to
explicitly test nearby points with the first derivative.
    How do we find candidate stationary points in the first place? For algebraic
functions, we solve f′(x) = 0; we find the solution set of all the x values that make
the first derivative of f(x) zero. We then use the derivative tests to decide which
are minima, maxima, or inflection points.
    For many functions, we can find the solutions to f′(x) = 0 directly. For
example, if f(x) = x3 − 2x + 4, we have f′(x) = 3x2 − 2. If we set this equal to zero,
3x2 − 2 = 0, and solve using the quadratic formula, we find that there are two
stationary points:                     and              . The second derivative of f(x)
is f′′(x) = 6x. The sign of f′′(x0) is negative; therefore, x0 represents a maximum.
And because the sign of f′′(x1) is positive, x1 is a minimum.
    We can see that the derivative tests are correct. The top of Figure 7-3 shows
us a plot of f(x) = x3 − 2x + 4, where x0 is a maximum and x1 is a minimum.
    Let’s look at one more example. This time, we have f(x) = x5−2x3+x+2, the
bottom plot of Figure 7-3. We find the first derivative and set it to zero:

                                     f′(x) = 5x4 − 6x2 + 1 = 0

    If we substitute u = x2, we can solve for the roots of f′(x) by finding the roots
of 5u2−6u+1 and setting those equal to x2. Doing this gives us           and
             , so we have four stationary points. To test them, we can use the
second derivative test. The second derivative is f′′(x) = 20x3 − 12x.
Substituting the stationary points into f′′ gives




meaning x0 is a maximum, x1 is a minimum, x2 is another maximum, and x3 is a
minimum. Figure 7-3 again confirms our conclusions.
Figure 7-3: Plots of f(x) = x3 – 2x + 4 (top) and x5 – 2x3 + x + 2 (bottom), with extrema marked

   What if we can’t easily find the stationary points of a function? Perhaps we
can’t solve the function algebraically, or maybe it can’t be expressed in closed
form, meaning no finite set of operations represents it. A typical calculus course
isn’t interested in these situations. Still, we need to be, because one way to think
of a neural network is as a function approximator, one whose function can’t be
expressed directly. Can we still profitably use our new knowledge of
derivatives? The answer is yes, we can. We can use the derivative as a pointer to
tell us how to move closer and closer to the extrema. This is what gradient
descent does, and we’ll spend quite a bit of time discussing it later in the book.
     For now, however, let’s move on and examine functions of more than one
variable and see what this does to the idea of a derivative.


Partial Derivatives
So far, we’ve focused exclusively on functions of one variable, x. What happens
to the notion of differentiation when we have functions of more than one
variable, say, f(x, y), or f(x0, x1, x2, . . . , xn)? To handle these cases, we’ll
introduce the idea of a partial derivative. Note that, for clarity, we’ll use
Leibniz’s notation in this section.
    Equation 7.2 defined the derivative of f(x) with respect to x. If x is the only
variable, why did we add the extra phrase “with respect to x”? Now we’ll find
out why: the partial derivative with respect to one of the variables in the
expression is found by holding all the other variables fixed. We treat them as if
they were constants. Then we say we’re calculating the partial derivative with
respect to the one not held fixed.
    Let’s look at an example. Let f(x, y) = xy + x/y. Then, we can calculate two
partial derivatives, one with respect to x and the other with respect to y:




The rules of differentiation we learned earlier in the chapter still apply. Notice
the d has changed to ∂. This indicates that the function, f, is of more than one
variable. Also, see that when calculating the respective derivatives, we held the
other variable fixed as if it were a parameter. As far as calculating partial
derivatives, that’s all there is to it. Let’s see a few more examples to help you
make the idea more concrete.
   If f(x, y, z) = x2 + y2 + z2 + 3xyz, we can find three partial derivatives:




The other two variables are considered constant. This is why, for example, in the
partial derivative with respect to x, y2 and z2 become 0, and 3xyz becomes 3yz.
   If                                 , we have four partial derivatives:




   As a more complex example, consider f(x, y) = exy cos x sin y. The partial
derivatives are listed next where we use the product rule in each case.




Mixed Partial Derivatives
Just as with the derivative of a function of a single variable, we can take partial
derivatives of a partial derivative. These are known as mixed partials.
Additionally, we have more flexibility because we can change which variable we
take the next partial derivative with respect to. For example, above, we saw that
the partial derivative of                              with respect to z is




which is still a function of x, y, z, and t. Therefore, we can calculate second
partial derivatives like so:
     I’ll explain the notation. We started with the partial derivative of f with
respect to z, so we write ∂f/∂z. Then, from this starting point, we are taking other
partial derivatives. So, if we want to denote the partial with respect to x, we think
of it this way:




where we can think of the partial derivative operator “multiplying” the
“numerator” and “denominator” like a fraction. To be clear, however, these are
not fractions; the notation has just inherited the flavor of a fraction from its slope
origins. Still, if the mnemonic is helpful, then it’s helpful. For a second partial
derivative, the variable it’s taken with respect to is on the left. Also, if the
variables are the same, an exponent (of sorts) is used, as in ∂2f/∂z2.

The Chain Rule for Partial Derivatives
To apply the chain rule to partial derivatives, we need to track all the variables.
So, if we have f(x, y), where both x and y are functions of other variables, x(r, s)
and y(r, s), then we can find the partials of f with respect to r and s by applying
the chain rule for each variable, x and y. Specifically,




   As an example, let f(x, y) = x3+y3 with x(r, s) = 3r+2s and y(r, s) = r2−3s.
Now find ∂f/∂r and ∂f/∂s. To find these partials, we’ll need to calculate six
expressions,




so that the desired partials are
    Just as with a function of a single variable, the chain rule for functions of
more than one variable is recursive, such that if r and s were themselves
functions of another variable, we could apply the chain rule one more time to
find the partial of f with respect to that variable. For example, if we have x(r, s),
y(r, s), with r(w), s(w), we find ∂f/∂w by using




    In the end, we need to remember that ∂f/∂w tells us how f will change for a
small change in w. We’ll use this fact during gradient descent.
    This section concerned itself with the mechanical calculation of partial
derivatives. Let’s move on to explore more of the meaning behind these
derivatives. Let’s move on to explore more of the meaning behind these
quantities. This will lead us to the idea of a gradient.


Gradients
In Chapter 8, we will dive into the matrix calculus representation we use in deep
learning. However, before we do that, we will conclude this chapter by
introducing the idea of a gradient. The gradient builds on the derivatives we’ve
been calculating. In short, the gradient tells us how a function of more than one
variable is changing and the direction in which it is changing the most.

Calculating the Gradient
If we have f(x, y, z), we saw above how to calculate partial derivatives with
respect to each of the variables. If we interpret the variables as positions on
coordinate axes, we see that f is a function that returns a scalar, a single number,
for any position in 3D space, (x, y, z). We could even go so far as to write f(x)
where x = (x, y, z) to acknowledge that f is a function of a vector input. As in
previous chapters, we’ll use lowercase bold letters to represent vectors, x. Note,
some people use to represent vectors.
    We can write vectors horizontally, as a row vector, like in the previous
paragraph, or vertically,




as a column vector, where we’ve also used square brackets instead of
parentheses. Either notation is acceptable. Unless we’re intentionally sloppy,
usually when we’re discussing a vector in code, we’ll assume that our vectors
are column vectors. This means a vector is a matrix with n rows and one column,
n × 1.
    A function that accepts a vector input and returns a single number as output
is known as a scalar field. The canonical example of a scalar field is
temperature. We can measure the temperature at any point in a room. We
represent the location as a 3D vector relative to some chosen origin point, and
the temperature is the value at that point, the average kinetic energy of the
molecules in that region. We can also talk about functions that accept vectors as
input and return a vector as output. These are known as vector fields. In both
cases, the field part refers to the fact that, over some suitable domain, the
function has a value for all inputs.
    The gradient is the derivative of a function that accepts a vector as input.
Mathematically, we represent the gradient as a generalization of the idea of
partial derivatives to n dimensions. For example, in 3D space, we can write




where the gradient operator, ▽, takes the partial derivative of f along each of its
dimensions. The ▽ operator goes by multiple names, like del, grad, or nabla.
We’ll use ▽ and call it del when we’re not simply saying “gradient operator.”
   In general, we can write




   Let’s parse Equation 7.7. First, we have a function, f, that accepts a vector
input, x, and returns a scalar value. To this function, we apply the gradient
operator:
This returns a vector (y). The gradient operator turns the scalar output of f into a
vector. Let’s spend some time thinking about what this means, what it’s telling
us about the value of the scalar field at a given position in space. (We’ll use
space when working with vectors, even if there’s no meaningful way to visualize
the space. An analogy to 3D space is helpful but only goes so far;
mathematically, the idea of space is more general.)
    As an example, consider a function in 2D space, f(x) = f(x, y) = x2 + xy + y2.
The gradient of f is then




    Since f is a scalar field, every point on the 2D plane has a function value.
This is the output of f(x) = f(x, y). So, we can plot f in 3D to show us a surface
changing with position. The gradient, however, gives us a set of equations.
These equations collectively tell us the direction and magnitude of the change in
the function value at a point, x = (x, y).
    For a function of a single variable, there’s only one slope at each point. Look
again at the tangent line of Figure 7-1. At the point xt, there’s only one slope.
The sign of the derivative at xt gives the direction of the slope, and the absolute
value of the derivative gives the magnitude (steepness) of the slope.
    However, once we change to more than one dimension, we have a bit of a
conundrum. Instead of only one slope tangent to the function, we now have an
infinite number. We can imagine a line tangent to the function at some point and
that the line points in any direction we so desire. The slope of the line tells us
how the function value is changing in that particular direction. We can find the
value of this change from the directional derivative, the dot product between the
gradient at the point under consideration and a unit vector in the direction we’re
interested in:

                 Duf(x) ≡ u• ▽f(x) = uT▽f(x) = ||u||||▽f(x)|| cos θ

where u is a unit vector in a particular direction, ▽f(x) is the gradient of the
function at the point x, and θ is the angle between them. The directional
derivative is maximized when cos θ is maximized, and this happens at θ = 0.
Therefore, the direction of the maximum change in a function at any point is the
gradient at that point.
    As an example, let’s pick a point on the 2D plane, say x = (x, y) = (0.5, −0.4)
with f(x, y) = x2 + xy + y2 from above. Then, the function value at x is x2 + xy +
y2 = (0.5)2 + (0.5)(−0.4) + (−0.4)2 = 0.21, a scalar. However, the gradient at this
point is




    Therefore, we now know that at the point (0.5, −0.4), the direction of the
largest change in f is in the direction (0.6, −0.3) and has a magnitude of
                             .

Visualizing the Gradient
Let’s make all of this less abstract. The top part of Figure 7-4 shows a plot of f(x,
y) = x2 + xy + y2 at selected points.
Figure 7-4: A plot of x2 + xy + y2 (top) and a 2D projection of the associated gradient field (bottom)

     The code to generate this plot is straightforward:
import numpy as np
x = np.linspace(-1.0,1.0,50)
y = np.linspace(-1.0,1.0,50)
xx = []; yy = []; zz = []
for i in range (50):
   for j in range (50):
      xx.append(x[i])
      yy.append(y[j])
      zz.append(x[i]*x[i]+x[i]*y[j]+y[j]*y[j])
x = np.array(xx)
y = np.array(yy)
z = np.array(zz)

     Here, we explicitly loop to generate the set of scatter plot points, x, y, and z,
to clearly show what’s happening. First, we use NumPy to generate vectors of 50
evenly spaced points [−1, 1] in x and y. Then we set up a double loop so that
each x gets paired with each y to calculate the function value, z. Temporary lists
xx, yy, and zz hold the triplets. Finally, we convert the lists to NumPy arrays for
plotting.
     The code to generate the scatter plot is

from mpl_toolkits.mplot3d import Axes3D
import matplotlib.pylab as plt
fig = plt.figure()
ax = fig.add_subplot(111, projection='3d')
ax.scatter(x, y, z, marker='.', s=2, color='b')
ax.view_init(30,20)
plt.draw()
plt.show()

We first load the matplotlib extension for 3D plotting, and then we set the subplot
for a 3D projection. The plot itself is made with ax.scatter, while ax.view_init and
plt.draw rotate the plot to give us a better view of the shape of the function before
showing it.
      In the bottom part of Figure 7-4, we see a vector plot of the gradient field for
x2 + xy + y2. This plot shows the direction and relative magnitude of the gradient
vector at a grid of points, (x, y). Recall, the gradient is a vector field, so each
point on the xy-plane has an associated vector pointing in the direction of the
greatest change in the function value. Mentally, we can see how the vector plot
relates to the function plot in the top part of Figure 7-4, where function values
near (−1, −1) and (1, 1) are changing quickly, whereas for points near (0, 0)
they’re changing slowly.
    The code to generate the vector field plot is

fig = plt.figure()
ax = fig.add_subplot(111)
x = np.linspace(-1.0,1.0,20)
y = np.linspace(-1.0,1.0,20)
xv, yv = np.meshgrid(x, y, indexing='ij', sparse=False)
dx = 2*xv + yv
dy = 2*yv + xv
ax.quiver(xv, yv, dx, dy, color='b')
plt.axis('equal')
plt.show()

    We first define the figure (fig) and subplot for 2D (no projection keyword).
Then, we need a grid of points. Above, we looped to get this grid so we could
understand what needed to be generated. Here, we use NumPy to generate the
grid for us via np.meshgrid. Note, we pass np.meshgrid the same x and y vectors we
had above to define the domain.
    The next two lines are a direct implementation of the gradient of f, Equation
7.8. These are the vectors we want to plot, with dx and dy giving us the direction
and magnitude, while xv and yv are the set of input points—400 total.
    The plot uses ax.quiver (since it plots arrows). The arguments are the grid of
points (xv, yv) and associated x and y values of the vectors at those points (dx, dy).
Finally, we ensure the axes are equal (plt.axis) to avoid warping the vector display,
then show the plot.
    We’ll conclude our introduction of gradients here. We’ll see them again
throughout the remainder of the book, in the notation in Chapter 8 and the
gradient descent discussions of Chapter 11.


Summary
This chapter introduced the main concepts of differential calculus. We started
with the notion of slope and learned the difference between secant and tangent
lines for a function of a single variable. We then formally defined the derivative
as the slope of a secant line as it approaches a single point. From there, we
learned the basic rules of differentiation and saw how to apply them.
    Next, we learned about the minima and maxima of a function and how to
find these points using derivatives. We then introduced partial derivatives as a
find these points using derivatives. We then introduced partial derivatives as a
way to calculate derivatives for functions of more than one variable. Partial
derivatives then led us to the gradient, which turns a scalar field into a vector
field and tells us the direction in which the function is changing the most. We
calculated an example gradient in 2D and saw how to generate plots showing the
relationship between the function and the gradient. We learned the crucial fact
that the gradient of a function points in the direction of the maximum change in
the function value at a point.
    Let’s continue our exploration of the math behind deep learning and move
into the world of matrix calculus.
                                        8
                    MATRIX CALCULUS




Chapter 7 introduced us to differential calculus. In this chapter, we’ll discuss
matrix calculus, which extends differentiation to functions involving vectors and
matrices.
    Deep learning works extensively with vectors and matrices, so it makes
sense to develop a notation and approach to representing derivatives involving
these objects. That’s what matrix calculus gives us. We saw a hint of this at the
end of Chapter 7, when we introduced the gradient to represent the derivative of
a scalar function of a vector—a function that accepts a vector argument and
returns a scalar, f(x).
    We’ll start with the table of matrix calculus derivatives and their definitions.
Next, we’ll examine some identities involving matrix derivatives.
Mathematicians love identities; however, to preserve our sanity, we’ll only
consider a handful. Some special matrices come out of matrix calculus, namely
the Jacobian and Hessian. You’ll run into both of these matrices during your
sojourn through deep learning, so we’ll consider them next in the context of
optimization. Recall that training a neural network is, fundamentally, an
optimization problem, so understanding what these special matrices represent
and how we use them is especially important. We’ll close the chapter with some
examples of matrix derivatives.


The Formulas
Table 8-1 summarizes the matrix calculus derivatives we’ll explore in this
chapter. These are the ones commonly used in practice.
Table 8-1: Matrix Calculus Derivatives

                 Scalar        Vector    Matrix
  Scalar         ∂f/∂x         ∂f/∂x     ∂F/∂x
  Vector         ∂f/∂x         ∂f/∂x     —
  Matrix         ∂f/∂X         —         —

     The columns of Table 8-1 represent the function, meaning the return value.
Notice we use three versions of the letter f: regular, bold, and capital. We use f if
the return value is a scalar, f if a vector, and F if a matrix. The rows of Table 8-1
are the variables the derivatives are calculated with respect to. The same notation
applies: x is a scalar, x is a vector, and X is a matrix.
     Table 8-1 defines six derivatives, but there are nine cells in the table. While
possible to define, the remaining derivatives are not standardized or used often
enough to make covering them worthwhile. That’s good for us, as the six are
enough of a challenge for our mathematical brains.
     The first derivative in Table 8-1, the one in the upper left, is the normal
derivative of Chapter 7, a function producing a scalar with respect to a scalar.
(Refer to Chapter 7 for everything you need to know about standard
differentiation.)
     We’ll cover the remaining five derivatives in the sections below. We define
each one in terms of scalar derivatives. We’ll first show the definition and then
explain what the notation represents. The definition will help you build a model
in your head of what the derivative is. I suspect that by the end of this section
you’ll be predicting the definitions in advance.
     Before we start, however, there is a complication we should discuss. Matrix
calculus is notation heavy, but there’s no universal agreement on the notation.
We’ve seen this before with the many ways to indicate differentiation. For
matrix calculus, the two approaches are numerator layout or denominator layout.
Specific disciplines seem to favor one over the other, though exceptions are
almost the norm, as is mixing notations. For deep learning, a nonscientific
perusal on my part seems to indicate a slight preference for numerator layout, so
that’s what we’ll use here. Just be aware that there are two forms out there. One
is typically the transpose of the other.

A Vector Function by a Scalar Argument
A vector function accepting a scalar argument is our first derivative; see Table 8-
1, second column of the first row. We write such a function as f(x) to indicate a
scalar argument, x, and a vector output, f. Functions like f take a scalar and map
it to a multidimensional vector:

                                    f : ℝ → ℝm

Here, m is the number of elements in the output vector. Functions like f are
known as vector-valued functions with scalar arguments.
   A parametric curve in 3D space is an excellent example of such a function.
Those functions are often written as


where , , and are unit vectors in the x, y, and z directions.
   Figure 8-1 shows a plot of a 3D parametric curve,


where, as t varies, the three axis values also vary to trace out the spiral. Here,
each value of t specifies a single point in 3D space.
Figure 8-1: A 3D parametric curve

    In matrix calculus notation, we don’t write f as shown in Equation 8.1.
Instead, we write f as a column vector of the functions,




and, in general,




for f with n elements.
    The derivative of f(x) is known as the tangent vector. What does the
derivative look like? Since f is a vector, we might expect the derivative of f to be
the derivatives of the functions representing each element of f, and we’d be
right:




    Let’s look at a simple example. First, we will define f(x), and then the
derivative:




Here, each element of ∂f/∂x is the derivative of the corresponding function in f.

A Scalar Function by a Vector Argument
In Chapter 7, we learned that a function accepting a vector input but returning a
scalar is a scalar field:

                                    f : ℝm → ℝ

We also learned that the derivative of this function is the gradient. In matrix
calculus notation, we write ∂f/∂x for f(x) as




where x = [x0 x1 ... xm–1]⊤ is a vector of variables, and f is a function of those
variables.
    Notice, because we decided to use the numerator layout approach, ∂f/∂x is
written as a row vector. So, to be true to our notation, we have to write




turning the row vector into a column vector to match the gradient. Remember
that ▽ is the symbol for gradient; we saw an example of the gradient in Chapter
7.

A Vector Function by a Vector
A Vector Function by a Vector
If the derivative of a vector-valued function by a scalar produces a column
vector, and the derivative of a scalar function by a vector results in a row vector,
does the derivative of a vector-valued function by a vector produce a matrix?
The answer is yes. In this case, we’re contemplating ∂f/∂x for f(x), a function
that accepts a vector input and returns a vector.
     The numerator layout convention gave us a column vector for the derivative
of f(x), implying we need a row for each of the functions in f. Similarly, the
derivative of f(x) produced a row vector. Therefore, merging the two gives us the
derivative of f(x):




This is for a function, f, returning an n-element vector and accepting an m-
element vector, x, as its argument:

                                   f : ℝm → ℝn

    Each row of f is a scalar function of x, for example, f0(x). Therefore, we can
write Equation 8.2 as




This gives us the matrix as a collection of gradients, one for each scalar function
in f. We’ll return to this matrix later in the chapter.

A Matrix Function by a Scalar
If f(x) is a function accepting a scalar argument but returning a vector, then we’d
be correct in assuming F(x) can be thought of as a function accepting a scalar
argument but returning a matrix:
                                  F : ℝ → ℝn×m

For example, assume F is an n × m matrix of scalar functions:




The derivative with respect to the argument, x, is straightforward:




    As we saw above, the derivative of a vector-valued function by a scalar is
called the tangent vector. By analogy, then, the derivative of a matrix-valued
function by a scalar is the tangent matrix.

A Scalar Function by a Matrix
Now let’s consider f(X), a function accepting a matrix and returning a scalar:

                                  f : ℝn×m → ℝ

    We’d be correct in thinking that the derivative of f with respect to the matrix,
X, is itself a matrix. However, to be true to our numerator layout convention, the
resulting matrix is not arranged like X, but instead like X⊤, the transpose of X.
    Why use the transpose of X instead of X itself? To answer the question, we
need to look back to how we defined ∂f/∂x. There, even though x is a column
vector, according to standard convention, we said the derivative is a row vector.
We used x⊤ as the ordering. Therefore, to be consistent, we need to arrange ∂f/
∂X by the transpose of X and change the columns of X into rows in the
derivative. As a result, we have the following definition.
This is an m × n output matrix for the n × m input matrix, X.
    Equation 8.4 defines the gradient matrix, which, for matrices, plays a role
similar to that of the gradient, ▽f(x). Equation 8.4 also completes our collection
of matrix calculus derivatives. Let’s move on to consider some matrix derivative
identities.


The Identities
Matrix calculus involves scalars, vectors, matrices, and functions thereof, which
themselves return scalars, vectors, or matrices, implying many identities and
relationships exist. However, here we’ll concentrate on basic identities showing
the relationship between matrix calculus and the differential calculus of Chapter
7.
    Each of the following subsections presents identities related to the specific
type of derivative indicated. The identities cover fundamental relationships and,
when applicable, the chain rule. In all cases, the results follow the numerator
layout scheme we’ve used throughout the chapter.

A Scalar Function by a Vector
We begin with identities related to a scalar function with a vector input. If not
otherwise specified, f and g are functions of a vector, x, and return a scalar. A
constant vector that doesn’t depend on x is given as a, and a denotes a scalar
constant.
    The basic rules are intuitive:



and
These show that multiplication by a scalar constant acts as it did in Chapter 7, as
does the linearity of the partial derivative.
   The product rule also works as we expect:



    Let’s pause here and remind ourselves of the inputs and outputs for the
equations above. We know that the derivative of a scalar function by a vector
argument is a row vector in our notation. So, Equation 8.5 returns a row vector
multiplied by a scalar—each element of the derivative is multiplied by a.
    As differentiation is a linear operator, it distributes over addition, so
Equation 8.6 delivers two terms, each a row vector generated by the respective
derivative.
    For Equation 8.7, the product rule, the result again includes two terms. In
each case, the derivative returns a row vector, which is multiplied by a scalar
function value, either f(x) or g(x). Therefore, the output of Equation 8.7 is also a
row vector.
    The scalar-by-vector chain rule becomes




where f(g) returns a scalar and accepts a scalar argument, while g(x) returns a
scalar and accepts a vector argument. The end result is a row vector. Let’s work
through a complete example to demonstrate.
    We have a vector, x = [x0, x1, x2]⊤; a function of that vector written in
component form, g(x) = x0 + x1x2; and a function of g, f(g) = g2. According to
Equation 8.8, the derivative of f with respect to x is
     To check our result, we can work through from g(x) = x0 + x1x2 and f(g) = g2
to find f(x) directly via substitution. Doing this gives us


from which we get




which matches the result we found using the chain rule. Of course, in this simple
example, it was easier to work through the substitution before taking the
derivative, but we proved our case all the same.
    We’re not entirely through with scalar-by-vector identities, however. The dot
product takes two vectors and produces a scalar, so it fits with the functional
form we’re working with, even though the arguments to the dot product are
vectors.
    For example, consider this result:
Here, we have the derivative of the dot product between x and a vector a that
does not depend on x.
    We can expand on Equation 8.9, replacing x with a vector-valued function,
f(x):



    What’s the form of this result? Assume f accepts an m-element input and
returns an n-element vector output. Likewise, assume a to be an n-element
vector. From Equation 8.2, we know the derivative ∂f/∂x to be an n × m matrix.
Therefore, the final result is a (1 × n) × (n × m) → 1 × m row vector. Good! We
know the derivative of a scalar function by a vector should be a row vector when
using the numerator layout convention.
    Finally, the derivative of the dot product of two vector-valued functions, f
and g, is



If Equation 8.10 is a row vector, then the sum of two terms like it is also a row
vector.

A Vector Function by a Scalar
Vector-by-scalar differentiation, Table 8-1, first row, second column, is less
common in machine learning, so we’ll only examine a few identities. The first
are multiplications by constants:




Note, we can multiply on the left by a matrix, as the derivative is a column
vector.
   The sum rule still applies,
as does the chain rule,




    Equation 8.12 is correct, since the derivative of a vector by a scalar is a
column vector, and the derivative of a vector by a vector is a matrix. Therefore,
multiplying the matrix on the right by a column vector returns a column vector,
as expected.
    Two other derivatives involving dot products with respect to a scalar are
worth knowing about. The first is similar to Equation 8.11 but with two vector-
valued functions of a scalar:




    The second derivative concerns the composition of f(g) and g(x) with respect
to x:




which is the dot product of a row vector and a column vector.

A Vector Function by a Vector
The derivatives of vector-valued functions with vector arguments are common in
physics and engineering. In machine learning, they show up during
backpropagation, for example, at the derivative of the loss function. Let’s begin
with some straightforward identities:
and



where the result is the sum of two matrices.
   The chain rule is next and works as it did above for scalar-by-vector and
vector-by-scalar derivatives:




with the result being the product of two matrices.

A Scalar Function by a Matrix
For functions of a matrix, X, returning a scalar, we have the usual form for the
sum rule:



with the result being the sum of two matrices. Recall, if X is an n × m matrix, the
derivative in numerator layout notation is an m × n matrix.
    The product rule also works as expected:



   However, the chain rule is different. It depends on f(g), a scalar function
accepting a scalar input, and g(X), a scalar function accepting a matrix input.
With this restriction, the form of the chain rule looks familiar:
   Let’s see Equation 8.13 in action. First, we need X, a 2 × 2 matrix:




   Next, we need                 and g(X) = x0x3 + x1x2. Notice, while g(X)
accepts a matrix input, the result is a scalar calculated from the values of the
matrix.
   To apply the chain rule, we need two derivatives,




where we are again using numerator layout for the result.
   To find the overall result, we calculate




   To check, we combine the functions to write a single function,
                          , and calculate the derivative using the standard chain
rule for each element of the resulting matrix. This gives us
matching the previous result.
   We have our definitions and identities. Let’s revisit the derivative of a
vector-valued function with a vector argument, as the resulting matrix is special.
We’ll encounter it frequently in deep learning.


Jacobians and Hessians
Equation 8.2 defined the derivative of a vector-valued function, f, with respect to
a vector, x:




    This derivative is known as the Jacobian matrix, J, or simply the Jacobian,
and you’ll encounter it from time to time in the deep learning literature,
especially during discussions of gradient descent and other optimization
algorithms used in training models. The Jacobian sometimes has a subscript to
indicate the variable it is with respect to; for example, Jx if with respect to x.
When the context is clear, we’ll often neglect the subscript.
    In this section, we’ll discuss the Jacobian and what it means. Then we’ll
introduce another matrix, the Hessian matrix (or just the Hessian), which is
based on the Jacobian, and learn how to use it in optimization problems.
    The essence of this section is the following: the Jacobian is the
generalization of the first derivative, and the Hessian is the generalization of the
second derivative.

Concerning Jacobians
We saw previously that we can think of Equation 8.14 as a stack of transposed
gradient vectors (Equation 8.3):
    Viewing the Jacobian as a stack of gradients gives us a clue as to what it
represents. Recall, the gradient of a scalar field, a function accepting a vector
argument and returning a scalar, points in the direction of the maximum change
in the function. Similarly, the Jacobian gives us information about how the
vector-valued function behaves in the vicinity of some point, xp. The Jacobian is
to vector-valued functions of vectors what the gradient is to scalar-valued
functions of vectors; it tells us about how the function changes for a small
change in the position of xp.
    One way to think of the Jacobian is as a generalization of the more specific
cases we encountered in Chapter 7. Table 8-2 shows the relationship between the
function and what its derivative measures.
Table 8-2: The Relationship Between Jacobians, Gradients, and Slopes

  Function                          Derivative
  f(x)                              ∂f/∂x, Jacobian matrix
  f(x)                              ∂f/∂x, gradient vector
  f(x)                              df/dx, slope

    The Jacobian matrix is the most general of the three. If we limit the function
to a scalar, then the Jacobian matrix becomes the gradient vector (row vector in
numerator layout). If we limit the function and argument to scalars, the gradient
becomes the slope. In a sense, they all indicate the same thing: how the function
is changing around a point in space.
    The Jacobian has many uses. I’ll present two examples. The first is from
systems of differential equations. The second uses Newton’s method to find the
roots of a vector-valued function. We’ll see Jacobians again when we discuss
backpropagation, as that requires calculating derivatives of a vector-valued
function with respect to a vector.

Autonomous Differential Equations
A differential equation combines derivatives and function values in one
equation. Differential equations show up everywhere in physics and engineering.
Our example comes from the theory of autonomous systems, which are
differential equations where the independent variable does not appear on the
right-hand side. For instance, if the system consists of values of the function and
first derivatives with respect to time, t, there is no t explicit in the equations
governing the system.
     The previous paragraph is just for background; you don’t need to memorize
it. Working with systems of autonomous differential equations ultimately leads
to the Jacobian, which is our goal. We can view the system as a vector-valued
function, and we’ll use the Jacobian to characterize the critical points of that
system (the points where the derivative is zero). We worked with critical points
of functions in Chapter 7.
     For example, let’s explore the following system of equations:




    This system includes two functions, x(t) and y(t), and they are coupled so
that the rate of change of x(t) depends on the value of x and the value of y, and
vice versa.
    We’ll view the system as a single, vector-valued function:




where we replace x with x0 and y with x1.
    The system that f represents has critical points at locations where f = 0, with
0 being the 2 × 1 dimensional zero vector. The critical points are




where substitution into f shows that each point returns the zero vector. For the
time being, assume we were given the critical points, and now we want to
characterize them.
   To characterize a critical point, we will need the Jacobian matrix that f
generates:
    Since the Jacobian describes how a function behaves in the vicinity of a
point, we can use it to characterize the critical points. In Chapter 7, we used the
derivative to tell us whether a point was a minimum or maximum of a function.
For the Jacobian, we use the eigenvalues of J in much the same way to talk
about the type and stability of critical points.
    First, let’s find the Jacobian at each of the critical points:




    We can use NumPy to get the eigenvalues of the Jacobians:

>>> import numpy as np
>>> np.linalg.eig([[4,0],[0,2]])[0]
array([4., 2.])
>>> np.linalg.eig([[2,0],[1,-2]])[0]
array([-2., 2.])
>>> np.linalg.eig([[0,-4],[2,-4]])[0]
array([-2.+2.j, -2.-2.j])

We encountered np.linalg.eig in Chapter 6. The eigenvalues are the first values that
eig returns, hence the [0] subscript to the function call.
     For critical points of a system of autonomous differential equations, the
eigenvalues indicate the points’ type and stability. If both eigenvalues are real
and have the same sign, the critical point is a node. If the eigenvalues are less
than zero, the node is stable; otherwise, it is unstable. You can think of a stable
node as a pit; if you’re near it, you’ll fall into it. An unstable node is like a hill; if
you move away from the top, the critical point, you’ll fall off. The first critical
point, c0, has positive, real eigenvalues; therefore, it represents an unstable node.
    If the eigenvalues of the Jacobian are real but of opposite signs, the critical
point is a saddle point. We discussed saddle points in Chapter 7. A saddle point
is ultimately unstable, but in two dimensions, there’s a direction where you can
“fall into” the saddle and a direction where you can “fall off” the saddle. Some
researchers believe most minima found when training deep neural networks are
really saddle points of the loss function. We see that critical point c1 is a saddle
point, since the eigenvalues are real with opposite signs.
    Finally, the eigenvalues of c2 are complex. Complex eigenvalues indicate a
spiral (also called a focus). If the real part of the eigenvalues is less than zero,
the spiral is stable; otherwise, it is unstable. As the eigenvalues are complex
conjugates of each other, the signs of the real parts must be the same; one can’t
be positive while the other is negative. For c2, the real parts are negative, so c2
indicates a stable spiral.

Newton’s Method
I presented the critical points of Equation 8.15 by fiat. The system is easy
enough that we can solve for the critical points algebraically, but that might not
generally be the case. One classic method for finding the roots of a function (the
places where it returns zero) is known as Newton’s method. This is an iterative
method using the first derivative and an initial guess to zero in on the root. Let’s
look at the method in one dimension and then extend it to two. We’ll see that
moving to two or more dimensions requires the use of the Jacobian.
    Let’s use Newton’s method to find the square root of 2. To do that, we need
an equation such that               . A moment’s thought gives us one: f(x) = 2 −
x2. Clearly, when                     .
    The governing equation for Newton’s method in one dimension is




where x0 is some initial guess at the solution.
    We substitute x0 for xn on the right-hand side of Equation 8.18 to find x1. We
then repeat using x1 on the right-hand side to get x2, and so on until we see little
change in xn. At that point, if our initial guess is reasonable, we have the value
we’re looking for. Newton’s method converges quickly, so for typical examples,
we only need a handful of iterations. Of course, we have powerful computers at
our fingertips, so we’ll use them instead of working by hand. The Python code
we need is in Listing 8-1.

import numpy as np
def f(x):
  return 2.0 - x*x
def d(x):
  return -2.0*x
x = 1.0
for i in range(5):
   x = x - f(x)/d(x)
   print("%2d: %0.16f" % (i+1,x))
print("NumPy says sqrt(2) = %0.16f for a deviation of %0.16f" %
    (np.sqrt(2), np.abs(np.sqrt(2)-x)))

Listing 8-1: Finding   via Newton’s method

    Listing 8-1 defines two functions. The first, f(x), returns the function value for
a given x. The second, d(x), returns the derivative at x. If f(x) = 2 − x2, then f′(x) =
−2x.
    Our initial guess is x = 1.0. We iterate Equation 8.18 five times, printing the
current estimate of the square root of 2 each time. Finally, we use NumPy to
calculate the true value and see how far we are from it.
    Running Listing 8-1 produces
1: 1.5000000000000000
2: 1.4166666666666667
3: 1.4142156862745099
4: 1.4142135623746899
5: 1.4142135623730951

NumPy says sqrt(2) = 1.4142135623730951 for a
deviation of 0.0000000000000000


which is impressive; we get       to 16 decimals in only five iterations.
    To extend Newton’s method to vector-valued functions of vectors, like
Equation 8.15, we replace the reciprocal of the derivative with the inverse of the
Jacobian. Why the inverse? Recall, for a diagonal matrix, the inverse is the
reciprocal of the diagonal elements. If we view the scalar derivative as a 1 × 1
matrix, then the reciprocal and inverse are the same. Equation 8.18 is already
using the inverse of the Jacobian, albeit one for a 1 × 1 matrix. Therefore, we’ll
iterate



for a suitable initial value, x0, and the inverse of the Jacobian evaluated at xn.
Let’s use Newton’s method to find the critical points of Equation 8.15.
    Before we can write some Python code, we need the inverse of the Jacobian,
Equation 8.17. The inverse of a 2 × 2 matrix,
is




assuming the determinant is not zero. The determinant of A is ad − bc.
Therefore, the inverse of Equation 8.17 is




Now we can write our code. The result is Listing 8-2.

  import numpy as np

  def f(x):
    x0,x1 = x[0,0],x[1,0]
    return np.array([[4*x0-2*x0*x1],[2*x1+x0*x1-2*x1**2]])

  def JI(x):
    x0,x1 = x[0,0],x[1,0]
    d = (4-2*x1)*(2-x0-4*x1)+2*x0*x1
    return (1/d)*np.array([[2-x0-4*x1,2*x0],[-x1,4-2*x0]])

 x0 = float(input("x0: "))
 x1 = float(input("x1: "))
❶ x = np.array([[x0],[x1]])

  N = 20
  for i in range(N):
   ❷ x = x - JI(x) @ f(x)
     if (i > (N-10)):
        print("%4d: (%0.8f, %0.8f)" % (i, x[0,0],x[1,0]))

Listing 8-2: Newton’s method in 2D

    Listing 8-2 echoes Listing 8-1 for the 1D case. We have f(x) to calculate the
function value for a given input vector and JI(x) to give us the value of the inverse
Jacobian at x. Notice that f(x) returns a column vector and JI(x) returns a 2 × 2
matrix.
    The code first asks the user for initial guesses, x0 and x1. These are formed
into the initial vector, x. Note that we explicitly form x as a column vector ❶.
    The implementation of Equation 8.19 comes next ❷. The inverse Jacobian is
a 2 × 2 matrix that we multiply on the right by the function value, a 2 × 1 column
vector, using NumPy’s matrix multiplication operator, @. The result is a 2 × 1
column vector subtracted from the current value of x, itself a 2 × 1 column
vector. If the loop is within 10 iterations of completion, the current value is
printed at the console.
    Does Listing 8-2 work? Let’s run it and see if we can find initial guesses
leading to each of the critical points (Equation 8.16). For an initial guess of

             , we get

11: (0.00004807, -1.07511237)
12: (0.00001107, -0.61452262)
13: (0.00000188, -0.27403667)
14: (0.00000019, -0.07568702)
15: (0.00000001, -0.00755378)
16: (0.00000000, -0.00008442)
17: (0.00000000, -0.00000001)
18: (0.00000000, -0.00000000)
19: (0.00000000, -0.00000000)

which is the first critical point of Equation 8.15. To find the two remaining
critical points, we need to pick our initial guesses with some care. Some guesses
explode, while many lead back to the zero vector. However, some trial and error
gives us




showing that Newton’s method can find the critical points of Equation 8.15.
    We started this section with a system of differential equations that we
interpreted as a vector-valued function. We then used the Jacobian to
characterize the critical points of that system. Next, we used the Jacobian a
second time to locate the system’s critical points via Newton’s method. We
could do this because the Jacobian is the generalization of the gradient to vector-
valued functions, and the gradient itself is a generalization of the first derivative
of a scalar function. As mentioned above, we’ll see Jacobians again when we
discuss backpropagation in Chapter 10.

Concerning Hessians
If the Jacobian matrix is like the first derivative of a function of one variable,
then the Hessian matrix is like the second derivative. In this case, we’re
restricted to scalar fields, functions returning a scalar value for a vector input.
Let’s start with the definition and go from there. For the function f(x), the
Hessian is defined as




where x = [x0 x1 . . . xn–1]⊤.
  Looking at Equation 8.20 tells us that the Hessian is a square matrix.
Moreover, it’s a symmetric matrix implying H = H⊤.
  The Hessian is the Jacobian of the gradient of a scalar field:

                                     Hf = J(▽f)

Let’s see this with an example. Consider this function:


If we use the definition of the Hessian in Equation 8.20 directly, we see that
               because ∂f/∂x0 = 4x0 + x2. Similar calculations give us the rest of
the Hessian matrix:




In this case, the Hessian is constant, not a function of x, because the highest
power of a variable in f(x) is 2.
    The gradient of f(x), using our column vector definition, is
with the Jacobian of the gradient giving the following, which is identical to the
matrix we found by direct use of Equation 8.20.




Minima and Maxima
We saw in Chapter 7 that we could use the second derivative to test whether
critical points of a function were minima (f′′ > 0) or maxima (f′′ < 0). We’ll see
in the next section how we can use critical points in optimization problems. For
now, let’s use the Hessian to find critical points by considering its eigenvalues.
We’ll continue with the example above. The Hessian matrix is 3 × 3, meaning
there are three (or fewer) eigenvalues. Again, we’ll save time and use NumPy to
tell us what they are:

>>> np.linalg.eig([[4,0,1],[0,-2,3],[1,3,0]])[0]
array([ 4.34211128, 1.86236874, -4.20448002])

     Two of the three eigenvalues are positive, and one is negative. If all three
were positive, the critical point would be a minimum. Likewise, if all three were
negative, the critical point would be a maximum. Notice that the
minimum/maximum label is the opposite of the sign, just like the single-variable
case. However, if at least one eigenvalue is positive and another negative, which
is the case with our example, the critical point is a saddle point.
     It seems natural to ask whether the Hessian of a vector-valued function, f(x),
exists. After all, we can calculate the Jacobian of such a function; we did so
above to show that the Hessian is the Jacobian of the gradient.
     It is possible to extend the Hessian to a vector-valued function. However, the
result is no longer a matrix, but an order-3 tensor. To see this is so, consider the
definition of a vector-valued function:
     We can think of a vector-valued function, a vector field, as a vector of scalar
functions of a vector. We could calculate the Hessian of each of the m functions
in f to get a vector of matrices,




but a vector of matrices is a 3D object. Think of an RGB image: a 3D array
made up of three 2D images, one each for the red, green, and blue channels.
Therefore, while possible to define and calculate, the Hessian of a vector-valued
function is beyond our current scope.

Optimization
In deep learning, you’re most likely to see the Hessian in reference to
optimization. Training a neural network is, to a first approximation, an
optimization problem—the goal is to find the weights and biases leading to a
minimum in the loss function landscape.
    In Chapter 7, we saw that the gradient provides information on how to move
toward a minimum. An optimization algorithm, like gradient descent, the subject
of Chapter 11, uses the gradient as a guide. As the gradient is a first derivative of
the loss function, algorithms based solely on the gradient are known as first-
order optimization methods.
    The Hessian provides information beyond the gradient. As a second
derivative, the Hessian contains information about how the loss landscape’s
gradient is changing, that is, its curvature. An analogy from physics might help
here. A particle’s motion in one dimension is described by some function of
time, x(t). The first derivative, the velocity, is dx/dt = v(t). The velocity tells us
how quickly the position is changing in time. However, the velocity might
change with time, so its derivative, dv/dt = a(t), is the acceleration. And, if the
velocity is the first derivative of the position, then the acceleration is the second,
d2x/dt2 = a(t). Similarly, the second derivative of the loss function, the Hessian,
provides information on how the gradient is changing. Optimization algorithms
using the Hessian, or an approximation of it, are known as second-order
optimization methods.
    Let’s start with an example in one dimension. We have a function, f(x), and
we’re currently at some x0. We want to move from this position to a new
position, x1, closer to a minimum of f(x). A first-order algorithm will use the
gradient, here the derivative, as a guide, since we know moving in the direction
opposite to the derivative will move us toward a lower function value. Therefore,
for some step size, call it η (eta), we can write

                                  x1 = x0 − η f′(x0)

This will move us from x0 toward x1, which is closer to the minimum of f(x),
assuming the minimum exists.
    The equation above makes sense, so why think about a second-order
method? The second-order method comes into play when we move from f(x) to
f(x). Now we have a gradient, not just a derivative, and the landscape of f(x)
around some point can be more complex. The general form of gradient descent is

                                  x1 = x0 − η▽f(x0)

but the information in the Hessian can be of assistance. To see how, we first
need to introduce the idea of a Taylor series expansion, a way of approximating
an arbitrary function as the sum of a series of terms. We use Taylor series
frequently in physics and engineering to simplify complex functions in the
vicinity of a specific point. We also often use them to calculate values of
transcendental functions (functions that can’t be written as a finite set of basic
algebra operations). For example, it’s likely that when you use cos(x) in a
programming language, the result is generated by a Taylor series expansion with
a sufficient number of terms to get the cosine to 32- or 64-bit floating-point
precision:




    In general, to approximate a function, f(x), in the vicinity of a point, x = a,
the Taylor series expansion is
where f(k)(a) is the kth derivative of f(x) evaluated at point a.
   A linear approximation of f(x) around x = a is

                               f(x) ≈ f(a) + f′(a)(x - a)

while a quadratic approximation of f(x) becomes



where we see the linear approximation using the first derivative and the
quadratic using the first and second derivatives of f(x). A first-order optimization
algorithm uses the linear approximation, while a second-order one uses the
quadratic approximation.
    Moving from a scalar function of a scalar, f(x), to a scalar function of a
vector, f(x), changes the first derivative to a gradient and the second derivative to
the Hessian matrix,



with Hf(a) the Hessian matrix for f(x) evaluated at the point a. The products’
order changes to make the dimensions work out properly, as we now have
vectors and a matrix to deal with.
    For example, if x has n elements, then f(a) is a scalar; the gradient at a is an
n-element column vector multiplying (x − a)⊤, an n-element row vector,
producing a scalar; and the last term is 1 × n times n × n times n × 1, leading to 1
× n times n × 1, which is also a scalar.
    To use the Taylor series expansions for optimization, to find the minimum of
f, we can use Newton’s method in much the same way used in Equation 8.18.
First, we rewrite Equation 8.21 to change our viewpoint to one of a displacement
(Δx) from a current position (x). Equation 8.21 then becomes



    Equation 8.22 is a parabola in Δx, and we’re using it as a stand-in for the
more complex shape of f in the region of x + Δx. To find the minimum of
Equation 8.22, we take the derivative and set it to zero, then solve for Δx. The
derivative gives




which, if set to zero, leads to




    Equation 8.23 tells us the offset from a current position, x, that would lead to
the minimum of f(x) if f(x) were actually a parabola. In reality, f(x) isn’t a
parabola, so the Δx of Equation 8.23 isn’t the actual offset to the minimum of
f(x). However, since the Taylor series expansion used the actual slope, f′(x), and
curvature, f′′(x), of f(x) at x, the offset of Equation 8.23 is a better estimate of the
actual minimum of f(x) than the linear approximation, assuming there is a
minimum.
    If we go from x to x + Δx, there’s no reason why we can’t then use Equation
8.23 a second time, calling the new position x. Thinking like this leads to an
equation we can iterate:




for x0, some initial starting point.
    We can work out all of the above for scalar functions with vector arguments,
f(x), which are the kind we most often encounter in deep learning via the loss
function. Equation 8.24 becomes



where the reciprocal of the second derivative becomes the inverse of the Hessian
matrix evaluated at xn.
    Excellent! We have an algorithm we can use to rapidly find the minimum of
a function like f(x). We saw above that Newton’s method converges quickly, so
using it to minimize a loss function also should converge quickly, faster than
gradient descent, which only considers the first derivative.
    If this is the case, why do we use gradient descent to train neural networks
    If this is the case, why do we use gradient descent to train neural networks
instead of Newton’s method?
    There are several reasons. First, we haven’t discussed issues arising from the
Hessian’s applicability, issues related to the Hessian being a positive definite
matrix. A symmetric matrix is positive definite if all its eigenvalues are positive.
Near saddle points, the Hessian might not be positive definite, which can cause
the update rule to move away from the minimum. As you might expect with a
simple algorithm like Newton’s method, some variations try to address issues
like this, but even if problems with the eigenvalues of the Hessian are addressed,
the computational burden of using the Hessian for updating network parameters
is what stops Newton’s algorithm in its tracks.
    Every time the network’s weights and biases are updated, the Hessian
changes, requiring it and its inverse to be calculated again. Think of the number
of minibatches used during network training. For even one minibatch, there are k
parameters in the network, where k is easily in the millions to even billions. The
Hessian is a k × k symmetric and positive definite matrix. Inverting the Hessian
typically uses Cholesky decomposition, which is more efficient than other
methods but is still an (k3) algorithm. The big-O notation indicates that the
algorithm’s resource use scales as the cube of the size of the matrix in time,
memory, or both. This means doubling the number of parameters in the network
increases the computational time to invert the Hessian by a factor of 23 = 8 while
tripling the number of parameters requires some 33 = 27 times as much effort,
and quadrupling some 43 = 64 times as much. And this is to say nothing about
storing the k2 elements of the Hessian matrix, all floating-point values.
    The computation necessary to use Newton’s method with even modest deep
networks is staggering. Gradient-based, first-order optimization methods are
about all we can use for training neural networks.

 NOTE
 This statement is perhaps a bit premature. Recent work in the area of
 neuroevolution has demonstrated that evolutionary algorithms can
 successfully train deep models. My experimentation with swarm
 optimization techniques and neural networks lends credence to this
 approach as well.

   That first-order methods work as well as they do seems, for now, to be a very
happy accident.
Some Examples of Matrix Calculus Derivatives
We conclude the chapter with some examples similar to the kinds of derivatives
we commonly find in deep learning.

Derivative of Element-Wise Operations
Let’s begin with the derivative of element-wise operations, which includes
things like adding two vectors together. Consider




which is the straightforward addition of two vectors, element by element. What
does ∂f/∂a, the Jacobian of f, look like? From the definition, we have




but f0 only depends on a0, while f1 depends on a1, and so on. Therefore, all
derivatives ∂fi/∂aj for i ≠ j are zero. This removes all the off-diagonal elements
of the matrix, leaving




since ∂fi/∂ai = 1 for all i. Similarly, ∂f/∂b = I as well. Also, if we change from
addition to subtraction, ∂f/∂a = I, but ∂f/∂b = −I.
    If the operator is element-wise multiplication of a and b, f = a ⊗ b, then we
get the following, where the diag(x) notation means the n elements of vector x
along the diagonal of an n × n matrix that is zero elsewhere.
Derivative of the Activation Function
Let’s find the derivative of the weights and bias value for a single node of a
hidden layer in a feedforward network. Recall, the inputs to the node are the
outputs of the previous layer, x, multiplied term by term by the weights, w, and
summed along with the bias value, b, a scalar. The result, a scalar, is passed to
the activation function to produce the output value for the node. Here, we’re
using the rectified linear unit (ReLU) which returns its argument if the argument
is positive. If the argument is negative, ReLU returns zero. We can write this
process as


    In order to implement backpropagation, we need the derivatives of Equation
8.25 with respect to w and b. Let’s see how to find them.
    We begin by considering the pieces of Equation 8.25. For example, from
Equation 8.9, we know the derivative of the dot product with respect to w is



where we have taken advantage of the fact that the dot product is commutative,
w • x = x • w. Also, since b does not depend on w, we have
   What about the derivative of ReLU? By definition,




implying that




since ∂z/∂z = 1.
    To find the derivatives of Equation 8.25 with respect to w and b, we need the
chain rule and the results above. Let’s start with w. The chain rule tells us how



with z = w • x + b and y = ReLU(z).
   We know ∂y/∂z; it’s the two cases above for the ReLU, Equation 8.27. So
now we have




and we know ∂z/∂w = x⊤; it’s Equation 8.26. Therefore, our final result is




where we’ve replaced z with w • x + b.
   We follow much the same procedure to find ∂y/∂b, as



but ∂y/∂z is 0 or 1, depending on the z’s sign. Likewise, ∂z/∂b = 1, which leads to
Summary
In this dense chapter, we learned about matrix calculus, including working with
derivatives of functions involving vectors and matrices. We worked through the
definitions and discussed some identities. We then introduced the Jacobian and
Hessian matrices as analogs for first and second derivatives and learned how to
use them in optimization problems. Training a deep neural network is,
fundamentally, an optimization problem, so the potential utility of the Jacobian
and Hessian is clear, even if the latter can’t be easily used for large neural
networks. We ended the chapter with some examples for derivatives of
expressions found in deep learning.
    This concludes the general mathematics portion of the book. We’ll now turn
our attention to using what we’ve learned to understand the workings of deep
neural networks. Let’s begin with a discussion of how data flows through a
neural network model.
