                                                                         1
                                                                         3


ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS
This penultimate chapter on machine learning algorithms brings us to
artificial neural networks (ANN) and the gateway to reinforcement
learning. Artificial neural networks, also known as neural networks , is a
popular machine learning technique for analyzing data through a network of
decision layers. The naming of this technique was inspired by the
algorithm’s structural resemblance to the human brain. While this doesn’t
mean artificial neural networks are a virtual reproduction of the brain’s
decision-making process, there does exist some general similarities.




Figure 45: Anatomy of a human brain neuron

The brain, for example, contains interconnected neurons with dendrites that
receive inputs. From these inputs, the neuron produces an electric signal
output from the axon and emits these signals through axon terminals to
other neurons. Similarly, artificial neural networks consist of interconnected
decision functions, known as nodes, which interact with each other through
axon-like edges .
The nodes of a neural network are separated into layers and generally start
with a wide base. This first layer consists of raw input data (such as
numeric values, text, image pixels or sound) divided into nodes. Each input
node then sends information to the next layer of nodes via the network’s
edges.




Figure 46: The nodes, edges/weights, and sum/activation function of a basic neural network

Each edge in the network has a numeric weight that can be altered based on
experience. If the sum of the connected edges satisfies a set threshold,
known as the activation function , this activates a neuron at the next layer. If
the sum of the connected edges does not meet the set threshold, the
activation function fails, which results in an all or nothing arrangement.
Moreover, the weights assigned to each edge are unique, which means the
nodes fire differently, preventing them from producing the same solution.
Using supervised learning, the model’s predicted output is compared to the
actual output (that’s known to be correct), and the difference between these
two results is measured as the cost or cost value . The purpose of training is
to reduce the cost value until the model’s prediction closely matches the
correct output. This is achieved by incrementally tweaking the network’s
weights until the lowest possible cost value is obtained. This particular
process of training the neural network is called back-propagation . Rather
than navigate from left to right like how data is fed into the network, back-
propagation rolls in reverse from the output layer on the right to the input
layer on the left.

The Black-box Dilemma
One of the downsides of a network-based model is the black-box
dilemma. Although the network can approximate accurate outputs, tracing
its decision structure reveals limited to no insight about how specific
variables influence its decision. For instance, if we use a neural network to
predict the outcome of a Kickstarter campaign (an online funding platform
for creative projects), the network can analyze numerous independent
variables including campaign category, currency, deadline, and minimum
pledge amount, etc. However, the model is unable to specify the
relationship of these independent variables to the dependent variable of the
campaign reaching its funding target. Algorithms such as decision trees and
linear regression, meanwhile, are transparent as they show the variables’
relationships to a given output. Moreover, it’s possible for two neural
networks with different topologies and weights to produce the same output,
which makes it even more challenging to trace the impact of specific
variables on the final output.
This begs the question of when should you use a neural network (given it’s
a black-box technique)? To answer this question, neural networks generally
fit prediction tasks with a large number of input features and complex
patterns, and especially problems that are difficult for computers to
decipher but simple and almost trivial for humans. One example is
the CAPTCHA (Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell
Computers and Humans Apart) challenge-response test on websites to
determine whether a user is human. Another example is identifying if a
pedestrian is preparing to step into the path of an oncoming vehicle. In both
examples, obtaining a fast and accurate prediction is more important than
decoding the specific variables and their relationship to the final output.

Building a Neural Network
A typical neural network can be divided into input, hidden, and output
layers. Data is first received by the input layer, where features are detected.
The hidden layer(s) then analyze and process the input features, and the
final result is shown as the output layer.
Figure 47: The three general layers of a neural network

The middle layers are considered hidden because, like human vision, they
covertly process objects between the input and output layers. When faced
with four lines connected in the shape of a square, our eyes instantly
recognize those four lines as a square. We don’t notice the mental
processing that is involved to register the four polylines (input) as a square
(output).
Neural networks work in a similar way as they break data into layers and
process the hidden layers to produce a final output. As more hidden layers
are added to the network, the model’s capacity to analyze complex patterns
also improves. This is why models with a deep number of layers are often
referred to as deep learning [23] to distinguish their deeper and superior
processing abilities.
While there are many techniques to assemble the nodes of a neural network,
the simplest method is the feed-forward network where signals flow only in
one direction and there’s no loop in the network. The most basic form of a
feed-forward neural network is the perceptron , which was devised in the
1950s by Professor Frank Rosenblatt.
Figure 48: Visual representation of a perceptron neural network

The perceptron was designed as a decision function for receiving inputs to
produce a binary output. Its structure consists of one or more inputs, a
processor, and a single output. Inputs are fed into the processor (neuron),
processed, and an output is then generated.
A perceptron supports one of two potential outputs, “0” or “1.” An output
of “1” triggers the activation function, while “0” does not. When working
with a larger neural network with additional layers, the “1” output can be
configured to pass the output to the next layer. Conversely, “0” is
configured to be ignored and is not passed to the next layer for processing.
As a supervised learning technique, the perceptron builds a prediction
model based on these five steps:
1) Inputs are fed into the processor.
2) The perceptron applies weights to estimate the value of those inputs.
3) The perceptron computes the error between the estimate and the actual
    value.
4) The perceptron adjusts its weights according to the error.
5) These four steps are repeated until you are satisfied with the model’s
    accuracy. The training model can then be applied to the test data.
To illustrate this process, let’s say we have a perceptron consisting of two
inputs:

Input 1: x1 = 24
Input 2: x2 = 16

We then add a random weight to these two inputs, and they are sent to the
neuron for processing.
Figure 49: Weights are added to the perceptron

Weights
Input 1: 0.5
Input 2: -1

Next, we multiply each weight by its input:
Input 1: 24 * 0.5 = 12
Input 2: 16 * -1 = -16

Although the perceptron produces a binary output (0 or 1), there are many
ways to configure the activation function. For this example, we will set the
activation function to ≥ 0. This means that if the sum is a positive number
or equal to zero, then the output is 1. Meanwhile, if the sum is a negative
number, the output is 0.




Figure 50: Activation function where the output (y) is 0 when x is negative, and the output (y) is 1
when x is positive

Thus:
Input 1: 24 * 0.5 = 12
Input 2: 16 * -1.0 = -16
Sum (Σ): 12 + -16 = -4

As a numeric value less than zero, the result produces “0” and does not
trigger the perceptron’s activation function. Given this error, the perceptron
needs to adjust its weights in response.

Updated weights:
Input 1: 24 * 0.5 = 12
Input 2: 16 * -0.5 = -8
Sum (Σ): 12 + -16 = 4

As a positive outcome, the perceptron now produces “1” which triggers the
activation function, and if in a larger network, this would trigger the next
layer of analysis.
In this example, the activation function was ≥ 0. We could, though, modify
the activation threshold to follow a different rule, such as:
x > 3, y = 1
x ≤ 3, y = 0




Figure 51: Activation function where the output (y) is 0 when x is equal to or less than 3, and the
output (y) is 1 when x is greater than 3

A weakness of a perceptron is that because the output is binary (0 or 1),
small changes in the weights or bias in any single perceptron within a larger
neural network can induce polarizing results. This can lead to dramatic
changes within the network and flip the final output, which makes it
difficult to train a model that is accurate with new data.
An alternative to the perceptron is the sigmoid neuron . A sigmoid neuron is
similar to a perceptron, but the presence of a sigmoid function rather than a
binary filter now accepts any value between 0 and 1. This enables more
flexibility to absorb small changes in edge weights without triggering
inverse results—as the output is no longer binary. In other words, the output
won’t flip due to a minor change to an edge weight or input value.
While more flexible than a perceptron, a sigmoid neuron is unable to
generate negative values. Hence, a third option is the hyperbolic tangent
function .




Figure 52: A hyperbolic tangent function graph

We have so far discussed basic neural networks; to develop a more
advanced neural network, we can link sigmoid neurons and other classifiers
to create a network with a higher number of layers or combine multiple
perceptrons to form a multilayer perceptron.

Multilayer Perceptrons
The multilayer perceptron (MLP), as with other ANN techniques, is an
algorithm for predicting a categorical (classification) or continuous
(regression) target variable. Multilayer perceptrons are powerful because
they aggregate multiple models into a unified prediction model, as
demonstrated by the classification model shown in Figure 48.




Figure 53: A multilayer perceptron used to classify a social media user’s political preference

In this example, the MLP model is divided into three layers. The input layer
consists of four nodes representing an input feature used to predict a social
media user’s political preference: Age, City, Education, and Gender. A
function is then applied to each input variable to create a new layer of nodes
called the middle or hidden layer. Each node in the hidden layer represents
a function, such as a sigmoid function, but with its own unique
weights/hyperparameters. This means that each input variable, in effect, is
exposed to five different functions. Simultaneously, the hidden layer nodes
are exposed to all four features.
The final output layer for this model consists of two discrete outcomes:
Conservative Party or Democratic Party, which classifies the sample user’s
likely political preference. Note that the number of nodes at each layer will
vary according to the number of input features and the target variable(s).
In general, multilayer perceptrons are ideal for interpreting large and
complex datasets with no time or computational restraints. Less compute-
intensive algorithms, such as decision trees and logistic regression, for
example, are more efficient for working with smaller datasets. Given their
high number of hyperparameters, multilayer perceptrons also demand more
time and effort to tune than other algorithms. In regards to processing time,
a multilayer perceptron takes longer to run than most shallow learning
techniques including logistic regression but is generally faster than SVM.

Deep Learning
For analyzing less complex patterns, a basic multilayer perceptron or an
alternative classification algorithm such as logistic regression and k -nearest
neighbors can be put into practice. However, as patterns in the data become
more complicated—especially in the form of a model with a high number
of inputs such as image pixels—a shallow model is no longer reliable or
capable of sophisticated analysis because the model becomes exponentially
complicated as the number of inputs increases. A neural network, with a
deep number of layers, though, can be used to interpret a high number of
input features and break down complex patterns into simpler patterns, as
shown in Figure 54.




Figure 54: Facial recognition using deep learning. Source: kdnuggets.com

This deep neural network uses edges to detect different physical features to
recognize faces, such as a diagonal line. Like building blocks, the network
combines the node results to classify the input as, say, a human’s face or a
cat’s face and then advances further to recognize individual characteristics.
This is known as deep learning . What makes deep learning “deep” is the
stacking of at least 5-10 node layers.
Object recognition, as used by self-driving cars to recognize objects such as
pedestrians and other vehicles, uses upward of 150 layers and is a popular
application of deep learning. Other applications of deep learning include
time series analysis to analyze data trends measured over set time periods or
intervals, speech recognition, and text processing tasks including sentiment
analysis, topic segmentation, and named entity recognition. More usage
scenarios and commonly paired deep learning techniques are listed in Table
13.




Table 13: Common usage scenarios and paired deep learning techniques

As can be seen from this table, multilayer perceptrons (MLP) have largely
been superseded by new deep learning techniques such as convolution
networks, recurrent networks, deep belief networks, and recursive neural
tensor networks (RNTN). These more advanced versions of a neural
network can be used effectively across a number of practical applications
that are in vogue today. While convolution networks are arguably the most
popular and powerful of deep learning techniques, new methods and
variations are continuously evolving.
CHAPTER QUIZ
Using a multilayer perceptron , your job is to create a model to classify
the gender sex) of penguins that have been affected and rescued in a natural
disaster. However, you can only use the physical attributes of penguins to
train your model. Please note that this dataset has 244 rows.




1)     How many output nodes does the multilayer perceptron need to
     predict the dependent variable of sex (gender)?
2) Which of the seven variables could we use as independent variables
   based on only the penguin’s physical attributes?
3) Which is a more transparent classification algorithm that we could
   use in replace of a multilayer perceptron?
A. Simple linear regression
B. Logistic regression
C. k -means clustering
D. Multiple linear regression
ANSWERS
1)   2 nodes (male and female)


2)   bill_length_mm, bill_depth_mm, flipper_length_mm, body_mass_g

3)   B, Logistic regression
                                                                         1
                                                                         4


