                                         IN THIS CHAPTER

                                         »» Upgrading the perceptron to the
                                            interconnection paradigm

                                         »» Structuring neural architectures
                                            made of nodes and connections

                                         »» Getting a glimpse of the
                                            backpropagation algorithm

                                         »» Understanding what deep learning is
                                            and what it can achieve




Chapter   14
Hitting Complexity with
Neural Networks

      A
             s you journey in the world of machine learning, you often see metaphors
             from the natural world to explain the details of algorithms. This chapter
             presents a family of learning algorithms that directly derives inspiration
      from how the brain works. They are neural networks, the core algorithms of the
      connectionists’ tribe (see the “Specifying the Role of Statistics in Machine
      Learning” section of Chapter 2 for a listing of the various tribes).

      Starting with the idea of reverse-engineering how a brain processes signals, the
      connectionists base neural networks on biological analogies and their compo-
      nents, using brain terms such as neurons and axons as names. However, you’ll
      discover that neural networks resemble nothing more than a sophisticated, non-
      linear kind of linear regression when you check their math formulations. Yet,
      these algorithms are extraordinarily effective against complex problems such as
      image and sound recognition, or machine language translation. They also can
      execute quickly when predicting (depending on their size, because some of the
      recent neural network models are huge).




                      CHAPTER 14 Hitting Complexity with Neural Networks          271
              Well-devised, large neural networks use the name deep learning and are behind
              such power tools as Siri and other digital assistants. They are behind the more
              astonishing machine learning applications as well. For instance, you see them at
              work in this incredible demonstration by Microsoft CEO Rick Rashid, who is
              speaking in English while being simultaneously translated into Chinese: https://
              www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nu-nlQqFCKg. If an AI revolution is about to happen,
              the increased learning capabilities of neural networks will likely drive it.

              You don’t have to type the source code for this chapter manually. In fact, using the
              downloadable source is a lot easier. You can find the source for this chapter in the
              ML4D2E folder of the downloadable source for Python code and the ML4D2ER folder
              of the downloadable source for the R code. The example files for this chapter will
              begin with ML4D2E; 14; (for Python) or ML4D2E_R; 14; (for R). See the Introduc-
              tion for details on how to find these source files.




Revising the Perceptron
              The core neural network algorithm is the neuron (also called a unit). Many neurons
              arranged in an interconnected structure make up a neural network, with each
              neuron linking to the inputs and outputs of other neurons. Thus, a neuron can
              input features from examples or the results of other neurons, depending on its
              location in the neural network.

              Something similar to the neuron, the perceptron, appears earlier in this book,
              although it uses a simpler structure and function. When the psychologist Rosen-
              blatt conceived the perceptron, he thought of it as a simplified mathematical ver-
              sion of a brain neuron. A perceptron follows these steps:

              1.   Takes values as inputs from the nearby environment (the dataset).

              2.   Weights these values (as brain cells do with electric signals, based on the
                   strength of the in-bound connections).

              3.   Sums all the weighted values.

              4.   Activates when the sum exceeds a threshold.

              This threshold outputs a value of 1; otherwise, its prediction is 0. Unfortunately, a
              perceptron can’t learn when the classes it tries to process aren’t linearly separa-
              ble. However, scholars discovered that even though a single perceptron couldn’t
              learn the logical operation XOR shown in Figure 14-1 (the exclusive or, which is
              true only when the inputs are dissimilar), two perceptrons working together
              could.




272   PART 4 Learning from Smart and Big Data
     FIGURE 14-1:
   Learning logical
       XOR using a
 single separating
line isn’t possible.



                       Neurons in a neural network are a further evolution of the perceptron: They take
                       many weighted values as inputs, sum them, and provide the summation as the
                       result, just as a perceptron does. However, they also provide a more sophisticated
                       transformation of the summation, something that the perceptron can’t do. In
                       observing nature, scientists noticed that neurons receive signals but don’t always
                       release a signal of their own. It depends on the amount of signal received. When a
                       neuron acquires enough stimuli, it fires an answer; otherwise it remains silent. In
                       a similar fashion, algorithmic neurons, after receiving weighted values, sum them
                       and use an activation function to evaluate the result, which transforms it in a non-
                       linear way. For instance, the activation function can release a zero value unless
                       the input achieves a certain threshold, or it can dampen or enhance a value by
                       nonlinearly rescaling it, thus transmitting a rescaled signal.

                       A neural network has different activation functions, as shown in Figure 14-2. The
                       linear function (labeled Binary step) doesn’t apply any transformation, and it’s
                       seldom used because it reduces a neural network to a regression with polynomial
                       transformations. Neural networks commonly use the sigmoid (also known as
                       logistic) or the hyperbolic tangent (labeled TanH), or the ReLU (which is by far the
                       more common today) activation functions.




     FIGURE 14-2:
Plots of different
       activation
       functions.



                       The figure shows how an input (expressed on the horizontal axis) can transform
                       an output into something else (expressed on the vertical axis). The examples show
                       a binary step, a logistic, a tangent hyperbolic, and a ReLU activation function.




                                        CHAPTER 14 Hitting Complexity with Neural Networks            273
                     You learn more about activation functions later in the chapter, but note for now
                     that activation functions clearly work well in certain ranges of input values. As
                     you can see from Figure 14-2, they output end-of-scale values outside certain
                     input boundaries. For this reason, you should always rescale inputs to a neural
                     network using statistical standardization (zero mean and unit variance) or nor-
                     malize the input in the range from 0 to 1 or from –1 to +1.



                     Pushing forth with feed-forward
                     In a neural network, you have first to consider the architecture, which is how the
                     neural network components are arranged. Contrary to other algorithms, which
                     have a fixed pipeline that determines how algorithms receive and process data,
                     neural networks require you to decide how information flows by fixing the num-
                     ber of units (the neurons) and their distribution in layers, as shown in
                     Figure 14-3.




      FIGURE 14-3:
   An example of
 the architecture
      of a neural
        network.



                     The figure shows a simple neural architecture. Note how the layers filter informa-
                     tion in a progressive way. This is a feed-forward input because data feeds forward
                     into the network in a single direction. Connections exclusively link the units in
                     one layer with the units in the following layers (information flow from left to
                     right). No connections exist between units in the same layer or with units outside
                     the next layers. The information usually pushes forward to the next layer, but it
                     can skip to additional layers forward. The example of Figure 14-3 shows the con-
                     nections from the left to the right, but in other representations, you may find
                     connections from top to bottom or bottom to top. Processed data never returns to
                     previous neuron layers.

                     Neural networks are also seen as graphs. A graph is simply a set of vertexes, nodes,
                     or points connected by edges, arcs, or lines. In the case of neural networks, the
                     graph is called a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) because:




274       PART 4 Learning from Smart and Big Data
 »» You can’t get from one vertex to another and back to the beginning vertex
     using any route.

 »» There is a predictable set of routes moving from one vertex to the next one.
There are kinds of neural networks that actually allow loops, though the loops
occur inside certain neurons (not between layers) and they’re limited to the size
of the input they receive. Such networks are called Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs), and they are briefly illustrated at the end of this chapter.

Using a neural network is like using a stratified filtering system for water: You
pour the water from above and the water is filtered at the bottom. The water has
no way to go back; it just goes forward and straight down, and never laterally. In
the same way, neural networks force data features to flow through the network
and mix with each other only according to the network’s architecture. By using
the best architecture to mix features, the neural network creates new composed
features at every layer and helps achieve better predictions. Unfortunately, there
is no way to determine the best architecture without empirically (or systemati-
cally) trying different solutions and testing whether output data helps predict
your target values after flowing through the network.

The first and last layers play an important role. The first layer, called the input
layer, picks up the features from each data example processed by the network. The
last layer, called the output layer, releases the results.

A neural network can process only numeric, continuous information; it can’t be
constrained to work with qualitative features (for example, labels indicating a
quality such as red, blue, or green in an image). You can process qualitative fea-
tures by transforming them into a continuous numeric value, such as a series of
binary values, as discussed in Chapter 7 in the material about working with data.
When a neural network processes a binary feature, the neuron treats the feature
as a generic number and turns the binary values into other values, even negative
ones, by processing across units.

Note the limitation of dealing only with numeric values, because you can’t expect
the last layer to output a nonnumeric label prediction. When dealing with a regres-
sion problem, the last layer is a single unit. Likewise, when you’re working with a
classification and you have output that must choose from a number of classes, you
should have an equivalent number of terminal units, each one representing a
score linked to the probability of the represented class. Therefore, when classify-
ing a multiclass problem (as discussed in the “Handling multiple classes” section
in Chapter 13), such as a penguin species, the final layer has as many units as spe-
cies. To see how this works, review the Palmer Penguins dataset demonstration in
the “Experimenting with K-means reliability” section of Chapter 12. You have
three units representing one of the three Penguin species: Adele, Chinstrap, or



                 CHAPTER 14 Hitting Complexity with Neural Networks                275
              Gentoo). For each example, the predicted class is the one that gets the higher
              score at the end.

              If the classes you predict can coexist (where a training example can be a member
              of multiple classes), you have a multilabel classification, and your terminal output
              neurons will provide probability estimates for each class independently from the
              other. A typical example of multilabel classification occurs when a neural network
              has to guess all the objects in a photo. All the possible objects are classes for the
              neural network, and each one receives a probability score of being in the photo. All
              the objects whose score exceeds a threshold are thus deemed to be in the photo.

              As a contrast to multilabel classification, when the classes you predict are mutu-
              ally exclusive (your problem is multiclass classification, as in the Penguins dataset),
              the sum of the probabilities derived from your output neurons should equal
              100 percent. There is a special final layer, called Softmax layer, which can adjust
              the probability of each class in such a way that the sum of the resulting probabili-
              ties equals to 1.0 (or 100 percent).

              In classification, the final layer may represent both a partition of probabilities
              thanks to a Softmax layer (and you have a multiclass problem in which total prob-
              abilities sum to 100 percent) or an independent score prediction (because an
              example can have more classes, which is a multilabel problem in which summed
              probabilities can be more than 100 percent). When the classification problem is a
              binary classification, a single node suffices.

              Contrary to other algorithms discussed so far, neural networks can have multiple
              output units as part of a regression problem, with each one representing a differ-
              ent regression problem. (For instance, in forecasting, you can have different pre-
              dictions for the next day, week, month, and so on.)



              Going even deeper down the rabbit hole
              Neural networks have different layers, each one having its own weights. Because
              the neural network segregates computations by layers, knowing the reference layer
              (the one used for the computation) is important because it provides the means for
              accounting for certain units and connections. Thus, you can refer to every layer
              using a specific number and generically talk about each layer using the letter l (so
              that the first layer would be l1, the second l2, and so on).

              Each layer can have a different number of units, and the number of units located
              between two layers dictates the number of connections. By multiplying the num-
              ber of units in the starting layer with the number in the following layer, you can
              determine the total number of connections between the two: number of connections(l)
              = units(l) * units(l+1).



276   PART 4 Learning from Smart and Big Data
A matrix of weights, usually named with the uppercase Greek letter theta (Θ),
represents the connections. For ease of reading, the book uses the capital letter W,
which is a fine choice because it is a matrix. Thus, you can use W1 to refer to the
connection weights from layer 1 to layer 2, W2 for the connections from layer 2 to
layer 3, and so on.

You may see references to the layers between the input and the output as hidden
layers and count layers starting from the first hidden layer. This is just a different
convention from the one used in the book. The examples in the book always start
counting from the input layer, so the first hidden layer is layer number 2.

Weights represent the strength of the connection between neurons in the net-
work. When the weight of the connection between two layers is small, it means
that the network dumps values flowing between them and signals that taking this
route won’t likely influence the final prediction. On the contrary, a large positive
or negative value affects the values that the next layer receives, thus determining
certain predictions. This approach is clearly analogous to brain cells, which don’t
stand alone but are in connection with other cells. As someone grows in experi-
ence, connections between neurons tend to strengthen or weaken to activate or
deactivate certain cell regions of the brain network, causing additional neural
processing or an activity with strong connections (a reaction to a danger, for
instance, if the processed information signals a life-threatening situation).

Now that you know some conventions regarding layers, units, and connections,
you can start examining the operations that neural networks execute in detail. To
begin, you can call inputs and outputs in different ways:


 »» a: The result stored in a unit in the neural network after being processed by
     the activation function (called g). This is the final output that is sent further
     along the network.

 »» z: The multiplication between a and the weights from the W matrix, followed
     by the addition of a bias value. z represents the signal going through the
     connections, analogous to water in pipes that flows at a higher or lower
     pressure depending on the pipe thickness. In the same way, the values
     received from the previous layer get higher or lower values because of the
     connection weights used to transmit them.


Each successive layer of units in a neural network progressively processes the
values taken from the features. Think of it as a conveyor belt. As data transits
the network, it arrives into each unit as a value produced by the summation of the
values present in the previous layer and weighted by connections represented in
the matrix W. When the data with added bias exceeds a certain threshold, the
activation function increases the value stored in the unit; otherwise, it extin-
guishes the signal by reducing or cancelling it. After processing by the activation



                  CHAPTER 14 Hitting Complexity with Neural Networks                     277
                     function, the result is ready to push forward to the connection linked to the next
                     layer. These steps repeat for each layer until the values reach the end and you have
                     a result, as shown in Figure 14-4.




      FIGURE 14-4:
   A detail of the
    feed-forward
     process in a
 neural network.



                     The figure shows a detail of the process that involves two units pushing their
                     results to another unit. This event happens in every part of the network. When you
                     understand the passage from two neurons to one, you can understand the entire
                     feed-forward process, even when more layers and neurons are involved. For more
                     explanation, here are the seven steps used to produce a prediction in a neural net-
                     work made of four layers (like the one shown earlier in the chapter in
                     Figure 14-3):

                     1.   The first layer (notice the superscript 1 on a) loads the value of each feature in
                          a different unit:

                             a(1)= X

                     2.   The weights of the connections bridging the input layer with the second layer
                          are multiplied by the values of the units in the first layer. A matrix multiplica-
                          tion weights and sums the inputs for the second layer together. The algorithm
                          adds a bias constant to layer two before running the activation function in the
                          following step.

                             z(2)=W(1)a(1) + bias(1)

                     3.   The activation function transforms the second-layer inputs. The resulting
                          values are ready to pass to the connections.

                             a(2) = g(z(2))

                     4.   The third-layer connections weigh and sum the outputs of layer two. The
                          algorithm adds a bias constant to layer three before proceeding to run the
                          activation function.

                             z(3) = W(2)a(2) + bias(2)


278       PART 4 Learning from Smart and Big Data
5.   The activation function transforms the layer-three inputs.

        a(3) = g(z(3))

6.   The layer-three outputs are weighted and summed by the connections to the
     output layer. Finally, the algorithm adds a bias constant to layer four before
     proceeding to run the activation function in the next step.

        z(4) = W(3)a(3) + bias(3)

7.   The output units receive their inputs and transform the input using the
     activation function. After this final transformation, the output units are ready
     to release the resulting predictions of the neural network.

        a(4) = g(z(4))

The activation function plays the role of a signal filter, helping to select the rele-
vant signals and avoid the weak and noisy ones (because it discards values below
a certain threshold). Activation functions also provide nonlinearity to the output
because they enhance or damp the values passing through them in a nonpropor-
tional way.

From another perspective, the weights of the connections provide a way to mix
and compose the features in a new way, creating new features in a way not too
different from a polynomial expansion. The activation renders nonlinear the
resulting recombination of the features by the connections. Both of these neural
network components enable the algorithm to learn complex target functions that
represent the relationship between the input features and the target outcome.

Feeding data forward from the input to the output layer is what exclusively
­happens when you predict. When you train a neural network, you have both a
 feed-forward and a backpropagation phase. The backpropagation phase helps you
 to refine the correct sets of weights in your network. Because the feed-forward
 phase depends on weight multiplication, you have to start with some weights or
 you won’t be able to run your network at all. Initialization provides some initial,
 randomly estimated weights.

How such initial weights are set matters because you can’t use numbers that are
too small — there will be too little signal for the network to work. However, you
must also avoid numbers that are too big because the calculations become too
cumbersome to handle. Sometimes they fail, which causes the exploding gradient
problem (see the article at https://machinelearningmastery.com/exploding-
gradients-in-neural-networks/ for details) or, more often, causes saturation of
the neurons, which means that you can’t correctly train a network because all the
neurons are always activated.


                 CHAPTER 14 Hitting Complexity with Neural Networks                     279
              Initializing your network using all zeros is always a bad idea because if all the
              neurons have the same value, they’ll react in the same way to the training input.
              No matter how many neurons the architecture contains, they operate as a single
              neuron. A simple solution is to start with initial random weights in the range
              required for the activation functions, which are the transformation functions that
              add flexibility to solving problems using the network. Another possible simple
              solution is to set the weights to zero mean and one standard deviation (a standard
              normal distribution, in statistics).

              There are smarter weight initializations for more complex networks, such as those
              found in this article: https://towardsdatascience.com/weightinitialization-
              techniques-in-neural-networks-26c649eb3b78.



              Pulling back with backpropagation
              From an architectural perspective, a neural network does a great job of mixing
              signals from examples and turning them into new features to achieve an approx-
              imation of complex nonlinear functions (functions that you can’t represent as a
              straight line in the features’ space). To create this capability, neural networks
              work as universal approximators (for more details, go to https://www.techleer.
              com/articles/449-the-universal-approximation-theorem-for-neural-
              networks/), which means that they can guess any target function. However, you
              have to consider that one aspect of this feature is the capacity to model complex
              functions (representation capability), and another aspect is the capability to learn
              from data effectively. Learning occurs in a brain because of the formation and
              modification of synapses between neurons, based on stimuli received by trial-
              and-error experience. Neural networks provide a way to replicate this process as
              a mathematical formulation called backpropagation.

              Since its early appearance in the 1970s, the backpropagation algorithm has been
              given many fixes. Each neural network learning process improvement resulted in
              new applications and a renewed interest in the technique. In addition, the current
              deep learning revolution, a revival of neural networks that were abandoned at the
              beginning of the 1990s, is the result of key advances in the way neural networks
              learn from their errors. As seen in other algorithms, the cost function activates
              the necessity to learn certain examples better (large errors correspond to high
              costs). When an example with a large error occurs, the cost function outputs a
              high value that is minimized by changing the parameters in the algorithm.

              In linear regression, finding an update rule to apply to each parameter (the vector
              of beta coefficients) is straightforward; you can manage it using gradient descent
              or by an analytical approach. However, in a neural network, things are a bit more
              complicated. The architecture is variable and the parameter coefficients (the con-
              nections) relate to each other because the connections in a layer depend on how



280   PART 4 Learning from Smart and Big Data
the connections in the previous layers recombined the inputs. The solution to this
problem is the backpropagation algorithm. Backpropagation is a smart way to
propagate the errors back into the network and make each connection adjust its
weights accordingly. If you initially feed-forward propagated information to the
network, it’s time to go backward and give feedback on what went wrong in the
forward phase.

Discovering how backpropagation works isn’t complicated, even though demon-
strating how it works using formulas and mathematics requires derivatives and
the proving of some formulations, which is quite tricky and beyond the scope of
this book. To get a sense of how backpropagation operates, start from the end of
the network, just at the moment when an example has been processed and you
have a prediction as an output. At this point, you can compare it with the real
result and, by subtracting the two results, get an offset, which is the error. Now
that you know the mismatch of the results at the output layer, you can progress
backward in order to distribute it along all the units in the network.

The cost function of a neural network for classification is based on cross-entropy
(as seen in logistic regression):

     Cost     y * log( h w ( X )) (1 y ) * log(1 h w ( X ))

This is a formulation involving logarithms. It refers to the prediction produced by
the neural network and expressed as hW(X) (which reads as the result of the net-
work given connections W and X as input). To make things easier, when ponder-
ing the cost, it helps to simply think of the formulation as computing the offset
between the expected results and the neural network output.

The first step in transmitting the error back into the network relies on backward
multiplication. Because the values fed to the output layer are made of the contri-
butions of all units, proportional to the weight of their connections, you can redis-
tribute the error according to each contribution. For instance, the vector of errors
of a layer n in the network, a vector indicated by the Greek letter delta (δ), is the
result of the following formulation:
       (n)
              W ( n )T *   ( n+1)



This formula says that, starting from the final delta, you can continue redistribut-
ing delta going backward in the network and using the weights you used to push
forward the value to partition the error to the different units. In this way, you can
get the terminal error redistributed to each neural unit, and you can use it to
recalculate a more appropriate weight for each network connection to minimize
the error. To update the weights W of layer l, you just apply the following formula:

     W ( 1)   W ( 1)       *
                               ( 1)         (1)
                                      * g’(z ) * a
                                                   (1)




                       CHAPTER 14 Hitting Complexity with Neural Networks       281
              It may appear to be a puzzling formula at first sight, but it is a summation, and you
              can discover how it works by looking at its elements. First, look at the function g'.
              It’s the first derivative of the activation function g, evaluated by the input values z.
              In fact, derivatives are a key component of the gradient descent optimization
              method (see the article at https://towardsdatascience.com/understanding-
              the-mathematics-behind-gradient-descent-dde5dc9be06e for details). Gradi-
              ent descent determines how to reduce the error measure by finding, among the
              possible combinations of values, the weights that most reduce the error.

              The Greek letter eta (η), sometimes also called alpha (α) or epsilon (ε) depending
              on the textbook you consult, is the learning rate. As found in other algorithms,
              using similar learning strategies, it reduces the effect of the update suggested by
              the gradient descent derivative. In fact, the direction provided by the weight
              updates may be only partially correct or just roughly correct (because of noise or
              errors in the data or because of the composition of the processed batch of exam-
              ples). By taking multiple small steps in the descent, the algorithm can take a more
              precise direction toward the global minimum error, which is the target you want
              to achieve (that is, a neural network producing the least possible prediction error).

              Different methods are available for setting the right eta value, because the opti-
              mization largely depends on it. One method sets the eta value starting high and
              reduces it during the optimization process. Another method variably increases or
              decreases eta based on the improvements obtained by the algorithm: Large
              improvements call a larger eta (because the descent is easy and straight); smaller
              improvements call a smaller eta so that the optimization will move slower, look-
              ing for the best opportunities to descend. Think of it as being on a tortuous path
              in the mountains: You slow down and try not to fall or be thrown off the road as
              you descend.

              Most implementations offer an automatic setting of the correct eta. You need to
              note this setting’s relevance when training a neural network because it’s one of
              the important parameters to tweak to obtain better predictions, together with the
              layer architecture.

              Weight updates can happen in different ways with respect to the training set of
              examples:


                »» Online mode: The weight update happens after every example traverses the
                   network. In this way, the algorithm treats the learning examples as a stream
                   from which to learn in real time. This mode is perfect when you have to learn
                   out-of-core, that is, when the training set can’t fit into RAM memory. However,
                   this method is sensitive to outliers, so you have to keep your learning rate low.
                   (Consequently, the algorithm is slow to converge to a solution.)




282   PART 4 Learning from Smart and Big Data
        »» Batch mode: The weight update happens after seeing all the examples in the
            training set. This technique makes optimization fast and less subject to having
            too much process variance because of variability in the example stream. On
            the other end, in batch mode, you need to keep all your examples in-memory
            (actually in RAM, rather than being streamed). In fact, in batch mode, the
            backpropagation considers the summed gradients of all examples.

        »» Mini-batch (or stochastic) mode: The weight update happens after the
            network has processed a subsample of randomly selected training set
            examples. This approach mixes the advantages of online mode (low memory
            usage) and batch mode (a rapid convergence), while introducing a random
            element (the subsampling) to avoid having the gradient descent stuck in a
            local minima (a drop in the cost function that isn’t the true minimum).




Representing the Way of Learning
of a Network
       Given the neural network architecture, you can imagine how easily the algorithm
       could learn almost anything from data, especially if you added too many layers. In
       fact, the algorithm does so well that its predictions are often affected by a high
       estimate variance called overfitting. Overfitting causes the neural network to learn
       every detail of the training examples, which makes it possible to replicate them in
       the prediction phase. However, in case of overfitting, apart from great results
       using the training set, it won’t ever correctly predict anything different. The fol-
       lowing sections discuss some of the issues with overfitting in more detail.



       Understanding the problem
       with overfitting
       When you use a neural network for a real problem, you have to take some caution-
       ary steps in a much stricter way than you do with other algorithms. Neural net-
       works are frailer and more prone to relevant errors than other machine learning
       solutions.

       First, you carefully split your data into training, validation, and test sets. Before the
       algorithm learns from data, you must evaluate the goodness of your parameters:


        »» Architecture (the number of layers and neurons in them): Using the right
            architecture offers great opportunities to create powerful predictive models at
            a high risk of overfitting.


                        CHAPTER 14 Hitting Complexity with Neural Networks                283
                       »» Initialization: Controlling how fast a network learns from data, but it may not
                           suffice in preventing overfitting the training data.

                       »» Activation functions: Examining the data multiple times to best learn the
                           patterns (an epoch or iteration marks each passage of the data through the
                           neural network).

                       »» Learning parameters: Avoiding random noise or direct memorization of
                           some parts of examples.

                       »» Number of iterations: Defining the number of useful epochs. The more
                           times this happens, the higher the risk that overfitting may occur.


                      You have two possible solutions to solve data goodness issues. The first is regular-
                      ization, as in linear and logistic regression. You can sum all connection coeffi-
                      cients, squared or in absolute value, to penalize models with too many coefficients
                      with high values (achieved by L2 regularization) or with values different from zero
                      (achieved by L1 regularization). The second solution is also effective because it
                      controls when overfitting happens. It’s called early stop (as shown in Figure 14-5)
                      and works by checking the cost function on the validation set as the algorithm
                      learns from the training set.




     FIGURE 14-5:
Overfitting occurs
  when there are
         too many
           learning
    iterations on
          the data.



                      You may not realize when your model starts overfitting. The cost function calcu-
                      lated using the training set keeps improving as optimization progresses. However,
                      as soon as you start recording noise from the data and stop learning general rules,
                      you can check the cost function on out-of-sample (the validation sample) data. At
                      some point, you’ll notice that it stops improving and starts worsening, which
                      means that your model has reached its learning limit.




284       PART 4 Learning from Smart and Big Data
Choosing a framework
The best way to learn how to build a neural network is to build one, and if you are
going to get your hands dirty, especially with deep learning, the most straightfor-
ward way is to leverage the functionalities offered by a framework. Using a deep
learning framework can greatly reduce the time, cost, and complexity of develop-
ing a deep learning solution. Even though deep learning frameworks have many
characteristics of frameworks in general (consistent domain solutions), they also
provide specific functionality: specialized hardware access for GPUs or TPUs, and
inclusion of computations designed for use in deep learning.

Python offers a wealth of possible frameworks for neural networks and deep
learning. At the time of the publication of this book, there are quite a few deep
learning frameworks around, such as


 »» TensorFlow (https://www.tensorflow.org/): This product is at the top
     of the heap with regard to deep learning frameworks. TensorFlow’s success
     stems from many reasons, but mainly it comes from providing a robust
     environment in a relatively easy-to-use package.

 »» PyTorch (https://pytorch.org/): Initially developed by Facebook, many
     other organizations use it today, including Twitter, Salesforce, and the
     University of Oxford. It’s particularly popular with academics because of its
     flexibility and ease of experimentation.

 »» MXNet (https://mxnet.apache.org/): An Apache product that supports
     a host of languages, including Python, Julia, C++, R, and JavaScript. Numerous
     large organizations use it, including Microsoft, Intel, and Amazon Web
     Services.

 »» Chainer (https://chainer.org/): Written purely in Python that relies on
     the NumPy (https://www.numpy.org/) and CuPy (https://cupy.dev/)
     libraries. It’s very popular in Japan.


 The research at the following site helps you understand the strengths and
 weaknesses of each deep learning framework: https://towardsdatascience.
 ­
 com/which-deep-learning-framework-is-growing-fastest-3f77f14aa318 .
TensorFlow is our choice for the examples in this book, as well as in other
­Dummies books on the topic (such as Deep Learning For Dummies and Data Science
 Programming All-in-One For Dummies, both by John Mueller and Luca Massaron
 [Wiley]), because of its diffusion, ease of use, robustness in various applications,
 and excellent support from Google (TensorFlow for instance is part of Colab).

Google also bundled the Keras package inside TensorFlow version 2.0 and above.
Keras is a package that allows you to build complex neural networks using a few
simple command sequences. The biggest selling point of Keras is that it puts the



                 CHAPTER 14 Hitting Complexity with Neural Networks                   285
              process of creating applications using a deep learning framework into a paradigm
              that most people can understand well. Keras started a few years ago as a stand-
              alone package developed by Francois Chollet. Over the years, it has enjoyed a large
              popularity among practitioners because of its practicality and ease of use, which
              also makes it the easy solution for reducing TensorFlow complexity.

              Originally, Keras was less of a framework and more of an API (a set of interface
              specifications that you can use with multiple frameworks as backends). The
              multi-backend stand-alone Keras was recently discontinued, and your only choice
              for the future is to use Keras as part of the Keras module bundled with TensorFlow
              (tf.keras).



              Getting your copy of TensorFlow and Keras
              Your copy of Python that comes with Anaconda doesn’t include a copy of Tensor-
              Flow with Keras; you must install this product separately. To avoid problems with
              integrating TensorFlow with the Anaconda tools, don’t follow the instructions
              found at https://www.tensorflow.org/install for installing the product.

              Some readers have noted that TensorFlow doesn’t install correctly on some plat-
              forms, most notably Windows 10. If you encounter problems getting a good install,
              you can still work through most of the examples using Google Colab, the product
              explained in Chapter 6. The text in Chapter 6 also explains differences between
              Notebook and Colab, along with some limitations of using Colab.




              REDUCING CONDA AND PIP ERRORS
              Before you do too much with your Anaconda installation, it helps to update both Conda
              and Package Installer for Python (PIP) — the two applications you use to install new fea-
              tures in the Python environment. Using an outdated version of either package manager
              could cause you considerable pain in trying to get anything to install correctly. In fact, as
              you install various packages, they tell you when your copy of the package manager you
              use is outdated in many cases. To update Conda and PIP, you use these commands at
              the Anaconda prompt:

                 conda update conda
                 python -m pip install --upgrade pip

              Whenever you’re in doubt about the status of either package manager, perform an
              update before you try to install a new package. The process takes only a few minutes
              and will save you considerable time later.




286   PART 4 Learning from Smart and Big Data
                      To ensure that your copies of TensorFlow and Keras are available with Notebook,
                      you must open an Anaconda prompt, not a standard command prompt or a termi-
                      nal window. Otherwise, you can’t ensure that you have the appropriate paths set
                      up. The following steps will get you started with your installation.

                      1. At the Anaconda prompt, type python --version and press Enter.
                           You see the currently installed Python version, which should be version 3.8.3
                           for this book, as shown in Figure 14-6. The path you see in the window is a
                           function of your operating system, which is Windows in this case, but you may
                           see a different path when using the Anaconda prompt. Notice the (base) part
                           of the prompt. This is an indicator of which environment you’re using, and
                           (base) is the default.




     FIGURE 14-6:
   Be sure to use
    the Anaconda
   prompt for the
  installation and
check the Python
           version.



                      2. Type conda update --all and press Enter.
                           Before you attempt to install TensorFlow and Keras, make sure that the conda
                           environment is up to date. Otherwise, you might find that some dependencies
                           are outdated and that your installation won’t work. Conda will perform an
                           analysis of your system and then provide a list of steps to take. When asked
                           whether you should proceed, type Y and press Enter. This step will take a
                           while — time to refill your coffee cup.

                           The next step is to create an environment in which to execute code that relies
                           on TensorFlow and Keras. The advantage of using an environment is that you
                           maintain a pristine environment for later use with other libraries. You use
                           Conda, rather than another environment product such as virtualenv, to ensure
                           that the software integrates with the Anaconda tools. If you use a product such
                           as virtualenv, the resulting installation will work, but you’ll have to perform a lot
                           of other steps to access it, and these steps don’t appear in the book. The name
                           of the environment for this book is TF_env.




                                        CHAPTER 14 Hitting Complexity with Neural Networks                    287
              3. Type conda create -n TF_env python=3.7 tensorflow anaconda nb_conda and
                   press Enter.

                   The conda utility will require some time to solve the environment and look for
                   conflicts. You may see a warning message about the availability of a newer
                   version of Conda. Ignoring this message generally isn’t safe, especially when
                   working with a Windows 10 system. When asked whether you should proceed,
                   exit the installation process by typing N and pressing Enter. Update your copy
                   of Conda using the information in the “Reducing Conda and PIP errors”
                   sidebar, and then restart the installation process. If you don’t see an error
                   message, type Y and press Enter when asked to proceed.

                   Notice that this installation is actually using Python 3.7. The Python 3.8.3
                   version used for the other examples in the book is incompatible with the 2.1
                   version of TensorFlow.

                   This step requires substantial time to complete, so be patient. You see the
                   Anaconda prompt return after all the required steps are complete. In the
                   meantime, reading a good technical article or getting coffee can help pass the
                   time.

              4. Type conda activate TF_env and press Enter.
                   The prompt changes to show the TF_env environment rather than the base or
                   root environment. Any tasks you perform now will affect the TensorFlow
                   environment rather than the original base environment.

              5. Type python -m pip install --upgrade pip and press Enter.
                   Note that this step upgrades the copy of pip used for TF_env, rather than the
                   base environment. If the copy of PIP is current in this environment, the
                   upgrade exits after telling you that PIP is up to date. This step requires a little
                   time, but not nearly as long as creating the environment. The purpose of this
                   step is to ensure that you have the most current version of PIP installed so that
                   later commands (some of which appear in the book’s code) don’t fail.

              6. Type conda install pyarrow and press Enter.
                   The code relies on PyArrow (http://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/
                   install.html) to read the .feather files used to store the datasets for this
                   book. You must install it in each of the environments you create.

              7. Type conda deactivate and press Enter.
                   Deactivating an environment returns you to the base environment. You
                   perform this step to ensure that you always end a session in the base
                   environment.

              8. Close the Anaconda Prompt.
                   Your TensorFlow with Keras installations are now ready for use.



288   PART 4 Learning from Smart and Big Data
                   In order to work with the TensorFlow examples in the book, you must now choose
                   a different environment in Anaconda Navigator. Open a copy of Anaconda
                   Navigator and you see the environment near the top in the Applications On
                   ­
                   ­drop-down list. When you click this drop-down list, you see the list of environ-
                    ments available to you, with the current environment selected, as shown in
                    Figure 14-7. Click the TF_env entry to work with TensorFlow examples. The tran-
                    sition takes a few seconds, but you see a change in the Anaconda Navigator setup
                    that shows that the new environment is in place. After the change in environment
                    completes, you can start Jupyter Notebook.




  FIGURE 14-7:
Use the TF_env
 channel for all
    TensorFlow
      examples
   in the book.



                   Opening the black box
                   It’s time to see how to use the TensorFlow framework to work through a problem.
                   For this example, you start with a very simple bidimensional problem inspired by
                   the TensorFlow Neural Network Playground (you can find the playground website
                   at this address: http://playground.tensorflow.org), trying to divide two
                   clouds of points shaped as opposing half-moons positioned in a Cartesian plane:

                     import numpy as np
                     from sklearn.datasets import make_moons
                     from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
                     import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
                     np.random.seed(0)
                     coord, cl = make_moons(500, noise=0.05)
                     X, Xt, y, yt = train_test_split(coord, cl,
                                                     test_size=0.30,
                                                     random_state=0)
                     cmap_set1 = plt.cm.Set1
                     fig, ax = plt.subplots(dpi=90)
                     ax.scatter(X[:,0], X[:,1], s=25, c=y, cmap=cmap_set1)
                     plt.show()

                   Looking at Figure 14-8, you can see that the task requires formulating a nonlinear
                   separation because no straight line can separate the two clouds of points exactly.




                                   CHAPTER 14 Hitting Complexity with Neural Networks           289
  FIGURE 14-8:
           The
 bidimensional
     half-moon
      problem.



                 Experimenting with the TensorFlow Neural Network Playground can help you
                 understand visually how a neural network works and gain understanding about
                 how the different parameters and hyper-parameters of a network have an impact
                 on the generated results.

                 After setting up the data for the example, the code creates a neural network solu-
                 tion by defining the architecture of the network that processes the data:

                   import tensorflow.keras as keras

                   model = keras.models.Sequential()
                   model.add(keras.layers.Input(2,))
                   model.add(keras.layers.Dense(8, activation='relu'))
                   model.add(keras.layers.Dense(8, activation='relu'))
                   model.add(keras.layers.Dropout(0.2))
                   model.add(keras.layers.Dense(1, activation='sigmoid'))

                   model.compile(optimizer='adam',
                                 loss='binary_crossentropy',
                                 metrics=['acc'])

                   model.summary()

                 In some cases, importing the required package will generate some warning mes-
                 sages that you can safely ignore because the code will run as expected. The errors
                 are generated by the package and not by the example code. When you run this
                 code, you see the following output, which shows the neural network makeup:

                   Model: "sequential"
                   _____________________________________________________



290   PART 4 Learning from Smart and Big Data
  Layer (type)          Output Shape             Param #
  =====================================================
  dense (Dense)         (None, 8)                24
  _____________________________________________________
  dense_1 (Dense)       (None, 8)                72
  _____________________________________________________
  dropout (Dropout)     (None, 8)                0
  _____________________________________________________
  dense_2 (Dense)       (None, 1)                9
  =====================================================
  Total params: 105
  Trainable params: 105
  Non-trainable params: 0
  _____________________________________________________

The code specifies a model using the Sequential() function after importing Keras
from TensorFlow. The function works as a pipeline of layers and operations to
execute from the first to the last. To define these layers, you call add() to define
the next operation, as you would do with building blocks stacked one upon the
other. You start with the Input layer, which feeds your data into the neural net-
work. The only requirement for this layer is to define the expected shape of your
data. Because the network normally expects the data to be divided into smaller
chunks, called batches, it cares only about other dimensions apart from the num-
ber of rows, namely the dimension of columns, but it can handle as many dimen-
sions as needed, marking a difference from other machine learning algorithms
that accept only matrices of cases by features as an input.

The Input layer handles the input, without applying any transformation. Because
neural networks rely on gradient descent, you usually standardize (by subtracting
the mean and dividing by the standard deviation) or normalize the inputs (forcing
them into a specific range of values such as between 0 and +1 or between
–1 and +1) beforehand. Also, you have to test which procedure, standardization or
normalization, works the best with your data and your network.

Two dense layers activated by ReLU activation follow the input layer. Here the
inputs combine and the activation functions reproduce nonlinear mappings
between the inputs and the results. A ReLU, or Rectified Linear Units, whose func-
tion is (A(x) = max(0, x)), provides an output in the range of zero to infinity:
When the input is above zero, it behaves similarly to a linear function, except for
the flat zero output when the inputs are zero or negative. In its simplicity, this
activation function is enough to approximate even complex nonlinear functions if
you stack enough layers of ReLU-activated neurons.




                 CHAPTER 14 Hitting Complexity with Neural Networks            291
                      An advantage of ReLU is that it requires less processing power because fewer neu-
                      rons fire a nonzero number. However, this advantage can also become a disadvan-
                      tage because when you have too many inactive neurons, you get a problem called
                      the dying ReLU. In fact, you can’t backpropagate any error to a neuron whose
                      output is zero, and the network stops learning or even working if there are many
                      dying ReLUs.

                      The two dense layers are followed by a dropout layer, whose purpose is to prevent
                      overfitting by randomly switching off some incoming connections between the
                      two processing layers and the last output neuron. This implementation randomly
                      excludes 20 percent of the incoming signals at each training iteration, with the
                      result shown in Figure 14-9.




     FIGURE 14-9:
          Dropout
 temporarily rules
  out a proportion
             of the
­connections from
      the training.



                      As depicted on the left side of Figure 14-9, the weights normally operate by mul-
                      tiplying their inputs into outputs for the activations. To switch off activation, the
                      code multiplies a mask made of a random mix of ones and zeros with the results.
                      If the neuron is multiplied by one, the network passes its signal. When a neuron
                      is multiplied by zero, the network stops its signal, forcing other neurons not to
                      rely on it in the process.

                      Finally the network is completed with an output neuron, activated by a sigmoid
                      function, which releases results in the range 0 to 1 that can be interpreted as prob-
                      abilities. (If the output is over 0.5, there is more than 50 percent probability that
                      the example is of the positive class.) The model is at last compiled (the final prep-
                      aration step) using an optimizer (in this case, the Adam optimizer, a general scope
                      and automatic optimizer based on the gradient descent), a cost function, and an
                      error measure to monitor.

                      Even if there seem to be too many parameters for the number of examples that
                      you have prepared for training (the rule of thumb in statistics is to have at least 10


292       PART 4 Learning from Smart and Big Data
                  or more examples of every model parameter), techniques such as dropout help to
                  keep overfitting under control. As a general approach, when using neural net-
                  works you shouldn’t be afraid of using complex architectures. You start with
                  medium-sized networks and you then determine whether reducing or increasing
                  the complexity of the architecture of the layers improves your results.

                  At this point, you can start the training by specifying the number of complete
                  iterations through the data. The more iterations, the more the neurons will acquire
                  information from the data, which risks overfitting. You also specify the batch,
                  which is the size of the data chunks to feed the optimizer, and you decide whether
                  you want to shuffle the input data at each iteration to inject randomization into
                  the process that may help the optimization.

                    history = model.fit(X, y, epochs=1000, batch_size=64,
                                        shuffle=True, verbose=0)

                  The training may take a while, but it won’t last too long. When completed, you can
                  ask for the accuracy on the test set and see that the neural network will work per-
                  fectly because the accuracy (that is, the ratio of correct classifications) is 1.0,
                  meaning that it’s a perfect fit.

                    from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score
                    predictions = (model.predict(Xt)>=0.5).astype(int)
                    test_accuracy = accuracy_score(yt, predictions)
                    print(f"Accuracy on test set: {test_accuracy}")

                  Given the simplicity of the problem, which is the mapping of clouds of points on
                  a Cartesian plane, you can also visualize the decision boundaries that separate one
                  cloud from the other, as produced by the neural network (see Figure 14-10).




 FIGURE 14-10:
       Decision
   boundaries
 display how a
neural network
     solves the
    half-moon
      problem.




                                  CHAPTER 14 Hitting Complexity with Neural Networks            293
              To produce the chart in Figure 14-10, representing how the neural network
              mapped a function that cuts through the plane, separating the two clouds of
              points, you have to test the neural network across a range of possible input values
              and then plot the results using different colors:

                steps = 100
                x_min, x_max = coord[:,0].min(), coord[:,0].max()
                y_min, y_max = coord[:,1].min(), coord[:,1].max()

                x_range = np.linspace(x_min, x_max, steps)
                y_range = np.linspace(y_min, y_max, steps)

                xx, yy = np.meshgrid(x_range, y_range)
                xy = np.stack([np.ravel(xx), np.ravel(yy)], axis=1)
                zz = model.predict(xy)
                zz = zz.reshape(xx.shape)

              The NumPy functions linspace() and meshgrid() help you produce the range of
              input abscissa and ordinate values and to combine them thoroughly. You then
              pass the combinations to the evaluation of the neural network and get a vector of
              predictions. Finally, you print the results as a contour plot, combined with your
              original scatterplot of the data points:

                cmap_rb = plt.get_cmap('RdBu')
                fig, ax = plt.subplots(dpi=90)
                ax.contourf(xx, yy, zz, cmap=cmap_rb,
                            alpha=0.3, levels=3)
                ax.scatter(coord[:,0], coord[:,1],
                           s=25, c=cl, cmap=cmap_set1)
                plt.show()

              For all your experiments on bidimensional toy datasets, you can visualize the
              decision boundaries. To use this approach for other machine learning algorithms,
              adapt and use the previous two code snippets.




Introducing Deep Learning
              After backpropagation, the next improvement in neural networks led to deep
              learning. Research continued in spite of AI winter, and neural networks started to
              take advantage of the developments in CPUs and GPUs (the graphic processing
              units better known for their application in gaming but which are actually powerful




294   PART 4 Learning from Smart and Big Data
computing units for matrix and vector calculations). These technologies make
training larger neural networks an achievable task in a shorter time and accessible
to more people. Research also opened a world of new applications. Neural net-
works can learn from huge amounts of data, and because they’re more prone to
high variance than to bias, they can take advantage of big data, creating models
that continuously perform better, depending on the amounts of data you feed
them. The following sections provide you with an overview of deep learning.



Understanding some deep
learning essentials
If you perceive deep learning to be only something that involves using larger net-
works than before, you miss an important point. Deep learning isn’t simply a
rebranding of an old technology; it works better than that technology because of
the extra sophistication it adds through the use of powerful computers and the
availability of better (not just more) data. Deep learning also implies a profound
qualitative change in the capabilities offered by the technology, along with new
and astonishing applications. The presence of these capabilities modernizes old
but good neural networks, transforming them into something new.

Because it uses many layers, deep learning can map more complex target func-
tions and solve problems that are out of reach of preexisting machine learning
techniques. These problems include image recognition, machine translation, and
speech recognition. When fitted with only a few layers, a neural network is a per-
fect universal function approximator, which is a system that can recreate any
possible mathematical function. When fitted with many more layers, a neural
network becomes capable of creating, inside its internal chain of matrix multipli-
cations, not only sophisticated target functions but also a sophisticated system of
feature representations suitable to solve complex problems.

One of the earliest deep learning achievements that made the public aware of its
potential is the cat neuron. The Google Brain team, run at that time by Andrew Ng
and Jeff Dean, put together 16,000 computers to calculate a deep learning network
with more than a billion weights, thus enabling unsupervised learning from You-
Tube videos. The computer network could even determine, without human inter-
vention, what a cat is, and Google scientists managed to dig out of the network a
representation of how the network itself expected a cat to look (see the Wired
article at https://www.wired.com/2012/06/google-x-neural-network/). How-
ever, you need large, complex networks to successfully tackle certain applications
(to learn complex features, such as the characteristics of a series of images).
Therefore, previous neural networks incurred problems like the vanishing gradi-
ent as soon as people tried to make them larger.




                CHAPTER 14 Hitting Complexity with Neural Networks            295
              A vanishing gradient occurs when you try to transmit a signal through a neural
              network and the signal quickly fades to near zero values; it can’t get through the
              activation functions. This happens because neural networks are chained multipli-
              cations. Each below-zero multiplication decreases the incoming values rapidly,
              and activation functions need large enough values to let the signal pass. The far-
              ther the neuron layers are from the output, the more likely they are to get locked
              out of updates because the signals are too small; the activation functions will stop
              them. Consequently, your network stops learning as a whole, or it learns at an
              incredibly slow pace.

              In fact, when training a large network, the error redistributes among the neurons
              favoring the layers nearest to the output layer. Layers that are further away receive
              smaller errors, sometimes too small, making training slow if not impossible.
              Today, deep networks are possible thanks to the studies of scholars from the Uni-
              versity of Toronto in Canada, such as Geoffrey Hinton (https://www.utoronto.
              ca/news/artificial-intelligence-u-t), who insisted on working on neural
              networks even when they seemed to most to be an old-fashioned machine learn-
              ing approach.

              Professor Hinton, a veteran of the field of neural networks (he contributed to
              defining the backpropagation algorithm), and his team in Toronto devised a few
              methods to circumvent the problem of vanishing gradients. He opened the field to
              rethinking new solutions that made neural networks a crucial tool in machine
              learning and AI again. The chapter has already examined some of his ideas, such
              as the ReLU activation and dropout. He also introduced smarter initializations and
              presented the idea of pretraining — a way of using the weights computed by a
              neural network trained for a similar problem — as a way to bootstrap a better
              solution.

              Deep learning is a complex and fascinating part of machine learning that is
              blooming just now. Deep Learning For Dummies, by John Paul Mueller and Luca
              Massaron (Wiley) thoroughly examines the concepts and practicalities of deep
              learning.



