Discovering the Incredible Perceptron
               You can start the journey toward discovering how machine learning algorithms
               work by looking at models that figure out their answers using lines and surfaces to
               divide examples into classes or to estimate value predictions. These are linear mod-
               els, and this chapter presents one of the earliest linear algorithms used in machine
               learning: the perceptron. Later chapters complete the overview of linear models.
               Chapter 13 introduces linear regression and its family of statistically derived algo-
               rithms; Chapter 14 helps you discover neural networks; and Chapter 15 talks about
               support vector machines. However, before you can advance to these other topics,
               you should understand the interesting history of the perceptron.



               Falling short of a miracle
               Frank Rosenblatt at the Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory devised the perceptron in
               1957 under the sponsorship of the United States Naval Research. Rosenblatt was a
               psychologist and pioneer in the field of artificial intelligence. Proficient in cogni-
               tive science, he had the idea to create a computer that could learn by trial and
               error, just as a human does.

               The idea was successfully developed, and at the beginning, the perceptron wasn’t
               conceived as just a piece of software; it was created as software running on dedi-
               cated hardware. The use of the combination allowed faster and more precise




176   PART 3 Getting Started with the Math Basics
recognition of complex images than any other computer could do at the time. The
new technology raised great expectations and caused a huge controversy when
Rosenblatt affirmed that the perceptron was the embryo of a new kind of com-
puter that would be able to walk, talk, see, write, and even reproduce itself and be
conscious of its existence. If true, it would have been a powerful tool, and it intro-
duced the world to a strong AI, which is an artificial intelligence that has capabili-
ties and functions similar to that of a human brain.

Needless to say, the perceptron didn’t realize the expectations of its creator. It
soon displayed a limited capacity, even in its image-recognition specialization.
The general disappointment ignited the first AI winter and the temporary aban-
donment of connectionism until the 1980s.

Connectionism is the approach to machine learning that is based on neuroscience
as well as the example of biologically interconnected networks. You can retrace
the root of connectionism to the perceptron. (See the “Specifying the Role of Sta-
tistics in Machine Learning” section of Chapter 2 for a discussion of the five tribes
of machine learning.)

The perceptron is an iterative algorithm that strives to determine, by successive
and reiterative approximations, the best set of values for a vector, w, which is also
called the coefficient vector. Vector w can help predict the class of an example when
you multiply it by the matrix of features, X (containing the information expressed
in numeric values) and then add it to a constant term, called the bias. The output
is a prediction in the sense that the previously described operations output a
number whose sign should be able to predict the class of each example in a binary
classification problem.

So far, the book has discussed three different meanings of bias: the sampling bias;
the error bias in the predictions of a machine learning algorithm; and, now, the
bias as the constant term in some machine learning formulations, such as in the
perceptron, based on the summation of weighted values.

The natural specialty of the perceptron is binary classification. However, you can
use it to predict multiple classes using more models (one for each class guess, a
training strategy called one-versus-all or OVA). Apart from classification, the
perceptron can’t provide much more information. For instance, you can’t use it to
estimate the probability of being exact in predictions. In mathematical terms, the
perceptron tries to minimize the following error function formulation, but it
does so only for the examples that are misclassified (in other words, whose sign
doesn’t correspond to the right class):

     Error     ieM   y i x iT w b




                                    CHAPTER 10 Starting with Simple Learners     177
               The formula, which is an example of a cost function as defined in Chapter 8,
               involves only the examples of the matrix X, which, under the current set of w,
               have been assigned a misclassified sign. To understand the function of the for-
               mula, you have to consider that there are only two classes. The examples from the
               first class are expressed as a +1 value in response to vector y, whereas the exam-
               ples from the other class are consequently coded as –1. The formula picks up each
               of the misclassified examples and, in turn, multiplies their features by the vector
               w, and then adds the bias.

               Because the multiplication of misclassified examples, X, by the weight vector, w,
               within the parentheses is a multiplication of vectors, you should transpose the x
               vector of features of an example so that the result of the multiplication with w is
               a number. This is an aspect of matrix multiplication covered in Chapter 7.

               Multiplying two vectors is the same as creating a weighted sum of the values of
               the first vector using the values in the second vector as the weights. Therefore, if
               xi has five features and the vector w has five coefficients, the result of their mul-
               tiplication is the sum of all five features, each one first multiplied by its respective
               coefficient. Matrix multiplication makes the procedure compact to express in for-
               mula, but in the end, the operation doesn’t differ from a weighted average.

               After getting the result of the multiplication of vectors, you sum the values to the
               bias and multiply everything to the value that you should have predicted (which is
               +1 for the first class and –1 for the second one). Because you’re working only with
               misclassified examples, the result of the operation is always negative because the
               multiplication of two sign-mismatched values is always negative.

               Finally, after running the same computation for all the misclassified examples,
               you pool all the results together and sum them. The result is a negative number
               that becomes positive because of the negative sign at the head of the error formula
               shown earlier (which is like multiplying everything by –1). The size of the result
               increases as the number of perceptron errors becomes larger.

               By observing the results carefully, you realize that the formula is devised in a
               smart way (although far from being miraculous, as expected by Rosenblatt). The
               output is smaller when the number of errors is smaller. When you have no mis-
               classification, the summation result turns to zero. By putting the formula in this
               form, you tell the computer to try to achieve perfect classification and never give
               up. The idea is that when it finds the right values of the vector w, and there aren’t
               any prediction errors, all that’s left to do is to apply the following formula:

                    ŷ sign Xw q

               Running the formula outputs a vector of predictions (y-hat) containing a sequence
               of +1 and –1 values that correspond to the expected classes.



178   PART 3 Getting Started with the Math Basics
                   Hitting the nonseparability limit
                   The secret to perceptron calculations is in how the algorithm updates the vector w
                   values. Such updates happen by randomly picking one of the misclassified exam-
                   ples (call it xt) and changing the w vector using a simple weighted addition:

                        w w      * xt * yt

                   The Greek letter eta (η) is the learning rate. It’s a floating number between 0 and 1.
                   When you set this value near zero, it can limit the ability of the formula to update
                   the vector w too much, whereas setting the value near one makes the update pro-
                   cess fully impact the w vector values. Setting different learning rates can speed up
                   or slow down the learning process. Many other algorithms use this strategy, and
                   lower eta is used to improve the optimization process by reducing the number of
                   sudden w value jumps after an update. The trade-off is that you have to wait lon-
                   ger before getting the concluding results.

                   The update strategy provides intuition about what happens when using a percep-
                   tron to learn the classes. If you imagine the examples projected on a Cartesian
                   plane, the perceptron is nothing more than a line trying to separate the positive
                   class from the negative one. As you may recall from linear algebra, everything
                   expressed in the form of y = x*b+a is actually a line in a plane.

                   Initially, when w is set to zero or to random values, the separating line is just one
                   of the infinite possible lines found on a plane, as shown in Figure 10-1. The updat-
                   ing phase defines it by forcing it to become nearer to the misclassified point.
                   Using multiple iterations to define the errors places the line at the exact border
                   between the two classes.




  FIGURE 10-1:
The separating
       line of a
   perceptron
    across two
        classes.




                                                 CHAPTER 10 Starting with Simple Learners           179
               In spite of being such a smart algorithm, perceptron showed its limits quite soon.
               Apart from being capable of guessing two classes using only quantitative features,
               it had an important limit: If two classes had no border due to mixing, the algo-
               rithm couldn’t find a solution and kept updating itself infinitively.

               If you can’t divide two classes spread on two or more dimensions by any line or
               plane, they’re nonlinearly separable. Overcoming data’s being nonlinearly separa-
               ble is one of the challenges that machine learning has to accomplish in order to
               become effective against complex problems based on real data, not just on artifi-
               cial data created for academic purposes.

               When the nonlinear separability matter came under scrutiny and practitioners
               started losing interest in the perceptron, experts quickly theorized that they could
               fix the problem by creating a new feature space (by recombining original features
               into new ones) in which previously inseparable classes are tuned to become sep-
               arable. Thus, the perceptron would be as fine as before. Unfortunately, creating
               new feature spaces is a challenge because it requires computational power that’s
               only partially available to the public today. Creating a new feature space is an
               advanced topic discussed later in the book when studying the learning strategies
               of more complex algorithms, such as neural networks and support vector
               machines.

               In recent years, the algorithm has had a revival thanks to big data: A perceptron,
               in fact, doesn’t need to work with all the data in memory, but it can do fine using
               single examples (by updating its coefficient vector only when a misclassified case
               makes it necessary). It’s therefore a perfect algorithm for online learning, such as
               learning from big data using small batches or even just by one example at a time.




