                                   11
     CALCULATING THE NUMBER OF PARAMETERS




How do we compute the number of parameters in a convolutional
neural network, and why is this information useful?
    Knowing the number of parameters in a model helps gauge the
model’s size, which affects storage and memory requirements. The
following sections will explain how to compute the convolutional and
fully connected layer parameter counts.


How to Find Parameter Counts
Suppose we are working with a convolutional network that has two
convolutional layers with kernel size 5 and kernel size 3, respectively.
The first convolutional layer has 3 input channels and 5 output
channels, and the second one has 5 input channels and 12 output
channels. The stride of these convolutional layers is 1. Furthermore, the
network has two pooling layers, one with a kernel size of 3 and a stride
of 2, and another with a kernel size of 5 and a stride of 2. It also has two
fully connected hidden layers with 192 and 128 hidden units each,
where the output layer is a classification layer for 10 classes. The
architecture of this network is illustrated in Figure 11-1.




Figure 11-1: A convolutional neural network with two convolutional and two fully connected
layers
   What is the number of trainable parameters in this convolutional
network? We can approach this problem from left to right, computing
the number of parameters for each layer and then summing up these
counts to obtain the total number of parameters. Each layer’s number of
trainable parameters consists of weights and bias units.

Convolutional Layers
In a convolutional layer, the number of weights depends on the kernel’s
width and height and the number of input and output channels. The
number of bias units depends on the number of output channels only.
To illustrate the computation step by step, suppose we have a kernel
width and height of 5, one input channel, and one output channel, as
illustrated in Figure 11-2.




Figure 11-2: A convolutional layer with one input channel and one output channel
   In this case, we have 26 parameters, since we have 5 × 5 = 25 weights
via the kernel plus the bias unit. The computation to determine an
output value or pixel z is z = b + ∑j wj xj, where xj represents an input
pixel, wj represents a weight parameter of the kernel, and b is the bias
unit.
   Now, suppose we have three input channels, as illustrated in Figure
11-3.




Figure 11-3: A convolutional layer with three input channels and one output channel
   In that case, we compute the output value by performing the
aforementioned operation, ∑j wj xj, for each input channel and then add
the bias unit. For three input channels, this would involve three
different kernels with three sets of weights:




    Since we have three sets of weights (w(1), w(2), and w(3) for j = [1, . . . ,
25]), we have 3 × 25 + 1 = 76 parameters in this convolutional layer.
    We use one kernel for each output channel, where each kernel is
unique to a given output channel. Thus, if we extend the number of
output channels from one to five, as shown in Figure 11-4, we extend
the number of parameters by a factor of 5. In other words, if the kernel
for one output channel has 76 parameters, the 5 kernels required for the
five output channels will have 5 × 76 = 380 parameters.




Figure 11-4: A convolutional layer with three input channels and five output channels
   Returning to the neural network architecture illustrated in Figure
11-1 at the beginning of this section, we compute the number of
parameters in the convolutional layers based on the kernel size and
number of input and output channels. For example, the first
convolutional layer has three input channels, five output channels, and a
kernel size of 5. Thus, its number of parameters is 5 × (5 × 5 × 3) + 5 =
380. The second convolutional layer, with five input channels, 12 output
channels, and a kernel size of 3, has 12 × (3 × 3 × 5) + 12 = 552
parameters. Since the pooling layers do not have any trainable
parameters, we can count 380 + 552 = 932 for the convolutional part of
this architecture.
    Next, let’s see how we can compute the number of parameters of
fully connected layers.

Fully Connected Layers
Counting the number of parameters in a fully connected layer is
relatively straightforward. A fully connected node connects each input
node to each output node, so the number of weights is the number of
inputs times the number of outputs plus the bias units added to the
output. For example, if we have a fully connected layer with five inputs
and three outputs, as shown in Figure 11-5, we have 5 × 3 = 15 weights
and three bias units, that is, 18 parameters total.
Figure 11-5: A fully connected layer with five inputs and three outputs
    Returning once more to the neural network architecture illustrated
in Figure 11-1, we can now calculate the parameters in the fully
connected layers as follows: 192 × 128 + 128 = 24,704 in the first fully
connected layer and 128 × 10 + 10 = 1,290 in the second fully connected
layer, the output layer. Hence, we have 24,704 + 1,290 = 25,994 in the
fully connected part of this network. After adding the 932 parameters
from the convolutional layers and the 25,994 parameters from the fully
connected layers, we can conclude that this network’s total number of
parameters is 26,926.
    As a bonus, interested readers can find PyTorch code to compute the
number of parameters programmatically in the supplementary/q11-conv-
size subfolder at https://github.com/rasbt/MachineLearning-QandAI-book.
Practical Applications
Why do we care about the number of parameters at all? First, we can
use this number to estimate a model’s complexity. As a rule of thumb,
the more parameters there are, the more training data we’ll need to
train the model well.
   The number of parameters also lets us estimate the size of the neural
network, which in turn helps us estimate whether the network can fit
into GPU memory. Although the memory requirement during training
often exceeds the model size due to the additional memory required for
carrying out matrix multiplications and storing gradients, model size
gives us a ballpark sense of whether training the model on a given
hardware setup is feasible.


Exercises
11-1. Suppose we want to optimize the neural network using a plain
      stochastic gradient descent (SGD) optimizer or the popular Adam
      optimizer. What are the respective numbers of parameters that
      need to be stored for SGD and Adam?
11-2. Suppose we’re adding three batch normalization (BatchNorm)
      layers: one after the first convolutional layer, one after the second
      convolutional layer, and another one after the first fully connected
      layer (we typically do not want to add BatchNorm layers to the
      output layer). How many additional parameters do these three
      BatchNorm layers add to the model?
                                  12
  FULLY CONNECTED AND CONVOLUTIONAL LAYERS




Under which circumstances can we replace fully connected layers with
convolutional layers to perform the same computation?
    Replacing fully connected layers with convolutional layers can offer
advantages in terms of hardware optimization, such as by utilizing
specialized hardware accelerators for convolution operations. This can
be particularly relevant for edge devices.
    There are exactly two scenarios in which fully connected layers and
convolutional layers are equivalent: when the size of the convolutional
filter is equal to the size of the receptive field and when the size of the
convolutional filter is 1. As an illustration of these two scenarios,
consider a fully connected layer with two input and four output units, as
shown in Figure 12-1.
Figure 12-1: Four inputs and two outputs connected via eight weight parameters
   The fully connected layer in this figure consists of eight weights and
two bias units. We can compute the output nodes via the following dot
products:

   Node 1 w1,1 × x1 + w1,2 × x2 + w1,3 × x3 + w1,4 × x4 + b1

   Node 2 w2,1 × x1 + w2,2 × x2 + w2,3 × x3 + w2,4 × x4 + b2

   The following two sections illustrate scenarios in which
convolutional layers can be defined to produce exactly the same
computation as the fully connected layer described.


When the Kernel and Input Sizes Are Equal
Let’s start with the first scenario, where the size of the convolutional
filter is equal to the size of the receptive field. Recall from Chapter 11
how we compute a number of parameters in a convolutional kernel with
one input channel and multiple output channels. We have a kernel size
of 2×2, one input channel, and two output channels. The input size is
also 2×2, a reshaped version of the four inputs depicted in Figure 12-2.
Figure 12-2: A convolutional layer with a 2×2 kernel that equals the input size and two
output channels
    If the convolutional kernel dimensions equal the input size, as
depicted in Figure 12-2, there is no sliding window mechanism in the
convolutional layer. For the first output channel, we have the following
set of weights:




   For the second output channel, we have the following set of weights:




   If the inputs are organized as
we calculate the first output channel as o1 = ∑i(W1 *x)i + b1, where the
convolutional operator * is equal to an element-wise multiplication. In
other words, we perform an element-wise multiplication between two
matrices, W1 and x, and then compute the output as the sum over these
elements; this equals the dot product in the fully connected layer.
Lastly, we add the bias unit. The computation for the second output
channel works analogously: o2 = ∑i(W2 * x)i + b2.
   As a bonus, the supplementary materials for this book include
PyTorch code to show this equivalence with a hands-on example in the
supplementary/q12-fc-cnn-equivalence subfolder at
https://github.com/rasbt/MachineLearning-QandAI-book.

When the Kernel Size Is 1
The second scenario assumes that we reshape the input into an input
“image” with 1×1 dimensions where the number of “color channels”
equals the number of input features, as depicted in Figure 12-3.




Figure 12-3: The number of output nodes equals the number of channels if the kernel size is
equal to the input size.
   Each kernel consists of a stack of weights equal to the number of
input channels. For instance, for the first output layer, the weights are
while the weights for the second channel are:




   To get a better intuitive understanding of this computation, check
out the illustrations in Chapter 11, which describe how to compute the
parameters in a convolutional layer.


Recommendations
The fact that fully connected layers can be implemented as equivalent
convolutional layers does not have immediate performance or other
advantages on standard computers. However, replacing fully connected
layers with convolutional layers can offer advantages in combination
with developing specialized hardware accelerators for convolution
operations.
   Moreover, understanding the scenarios where fully connected layers
are equivalent to convolutional layers aids in understanding the
mechanics of these layers. It also lets us implement convolutional neural
networks without any use of fully connected layers, if desired, to
simplify code implementations.


Exercises
12-1. How would increasing the stride affect the equivalence discussed
      in this chapter?
12-2. Does padding affect the equivalence between fully connected
      layers and convolutional layers?
