                                 10
                 SOURCES OF RANDOMNESS




What are the common sources of randomness when training deep
neural networks that can cause non-reproducible behavior during
training and inference?
   When training or using machine learning models such as deep
neural networks, several sources of randomness can lead to different
results every time we train or run these models, even though we use the
same overall settings. Some of these effects are accidental and some are
intended. The following sections categorize and discuss these various
sources of randomness.
   Optional hands-on examples for most of these categories are
provided in the supplementary/q10-random-sources subfolder at
https://github.com/rasbt/MachineLearning-QandAI-book.

Model Weight Initialization
All common deep neural network frameworks, including TensorFlow
and PyTorch, randomly initialize the weights and bias units at each layer
by default. This means that the final model will be different every time
we start the training. The reason these trained models will differ when
we start with different random weights is the nonconvex nature of the
loss, as illustrated in Figure 10-1. As the figure shows, the loss will
converge to different local minima depending on where the initial
starting weights are located.




Figure 10-1: Different starting weights can lead to different final weights.
    In practice, it is therefore recommended to run the training (if the
computational resources permit) at least a handful of times; unlucky
initial weights can sometimes cause the model not to converge or to
converge to a local minimum corresponding to poorer predictive
accuracy.
    However, we can make the random weight initialization
deterministic by seeding the random generator. For instance, if we set
the seed to a specific value like 123, the weights will still initialize with
small random values. Nonetheless, the neural network will consistently
initialize with the same small random weights, enabling accurate
reproduction of results.


Dataset Sampling and Shuffling
When we train and evaluate machine learning models, we usually start
by dividing a dataset into training and test sets. This requires random
sampling since we have to decide which examples we put into a training
set and which examples we put into a test set.
    In practice, we often use model evaluation techniques such as k-fold
cross-validation or holdout validation. In holdout validation, we split
the training set into training, validation, and test datasets, which are also
sampling procedures influenced by randomness. Similarly, unless we use
a fixed random seed, we get a different model each time we partition the
dataset or tune or evaluate the model using k-fold cross-validation since
the training partitions will differ.


Nondeterministic Algorithms
We may include random components and algorithms depending on the
architecture and hyperparameter choices. A popular example of this is
dropout.
   Dropout works by randomly setting a fraction of a layer’s units to
zero during training, which helps the model learn more robust and
generalized representations. This “dropping out” is typically applied at
each training iteration with a probability p, a hyperparameter that
controls the fraction of units dropped out. Typical values for p are in the
range of 0.2 to 0.8.
   To illustrate this concept, Figure 10-2 shows a small neural network
where dropout randomly drops a subset of the hidden layer nodes in
each forward pass during training.




Figure 10-2: In dropout, hidden nodes are intermittently and randomly disabled during each
forward pass in training.
   To create reproducible training runs, we must seed the random
generator before training with dropout (analogous to seeding the
random generator before initializing the model weights). During
inference, we need to disable dropout to guarantee deterministic results.
Each deep learning framework has a specific setting for that purpose—a
PyTorch example is included in the supplementary/q10-random-sources
subfolder at https://github.com/rasbt/MachineLearning-QandAI-book.


Different Runtime Algorithms
The most intuitive or simplest implementation of an algorithm or
method is not always the best one to use in practice. For example, when
training deep neural networks, we often use efficient alternatives and
approximations to gain speed and resource advantages during training
and inference.
   A popular example is the convolution operation used in
convolutional neural networks. There are several possible ways to
implement the convolution operation:
  The classic direct convolution The common implementation of
  discrete convolution via an element-wise product between the input
  and the window, followed by summing the result to get a single
  number. (See Chapter 12 for a discussion of the convolution
  operation.)
  FFT-based convolution Uses fast Fourier transform (FFT) to
  convert the convolution into an element-wise multiplication in the
  frequency domain.
  Winograd-based convolution An efficient algorithm for small filter
  sizes (like 3×3) that reduces the number of multiplications required
  for the convolution.

    Different convolution algorithms have different trade-offs in terms
of memory usage, computational complexity, and speed. By default,
libraries such as the CUDA Deep Neural Network library (cuDNN),
which are used in PyTorch and TensorFlow, can choose different
algorithms for performing convolution operations when running deep
neural networks on GPUs. However, the deterministic algorithm choice
has to be explicitly enabled. In PyTorch, for example, this can be done
by setting

torch.use_deterministic_algorithms(True)

    While these approximations yield similar results, subtle numerical
differences can accumulate during training and cause the training to
converge to slightly different local minima.


Hardware and Drivers
Training deep neural networks on different hardware can also produce
different results due to small numeric differences, even when the same
algorithms are used and the same operations are executed. These
differences may sometimes be due to different numeric precision for
floating-point operations. However, small numeric differences may also
arise due to hardware and software optimization, even at the same
precision.
    For instance, different hardware platforms may have specialized
optimizations or libraries that can slightly alter the behavior of deep
learning algorithms. To give one example of how different GPUs can
produce different modeling results, the following is a quotation from
the official NVIDIA documentation: “Across different architectures, no
cuDNN routines guarantee bit-wise reproducibility. For example, there
is no guarantee of bit-wise reproducibility when comparing the same
routine run on NVIDIA VoltaTM and NVIDIA TuringTM [. . .] and
NVIDIA Ampere architecture.”


Randomness and Generative AI
Besides the various sources of randomness mentioned earlier, certain
models may also exhibit random behavior during inference that we can
think of as “randomness by design.” For instance, generative image and
language models may create different results for identical prompts to
produce a diverse sample of results. For image models, this is often so
that users can select the most accurate and aesthetically pleasing image.
For language models, this is often to vary the responses, for example, in
chat agents, to avoid repetition.
    The intended randomness in generative image models during
inference is often due to sampling different noise values at each step of
the reverse process. In diffusion models, a noise schedule defines the
noise variance added at each step of the diffusion process.
    Autoregressive LLMs like GPT tend to create different outputs for
the same input prompt (GPT will be discussed at greater length in
Chapters 14 and 17). The ChatGPT user interface even has a
Regenerate Response button for that purpose. The ability to generate
different results is due to the sampling strategies these models employ.
Techniques such as top-k sampling, nucleus sampling, and temperature
scaling influence the model’s output by controlling the degree of
randomness. This is a feature, not a bug, since it allows for diverse
responses and prevents the model from producing overly deterministic
or repetitive outputs. (See Chapter 9 for a more in-depth overview of
generative AI and deep learning models; see Chapter 17 for more detail
on autoregressive LLMs.)
   Top-k sampling, illustrated in Figure 10-3, works by sampling tokens
from the top k most probable candidates at each step of the next-word
generation process.




Figure 10-3: Top-k sampling
    Given an input prompt, the language model produces a probability
distribution over the entire vocabulary (the candidate words) for the
next token. Each token in the vocabulary is assigned a probability based
on the model’s understanding of the context. The selected top-k tokens
are then renormalized so that the probabilities sum to 1. Finally, a token
is sampled from the renormalized top-k probability distribution and is
appended to the input prompt. This process is repeated for the desired
length of the generated text or until a stop condition is met.
   Nucleus sampling (also known as top-p sampling), illustrated in Figure
10-4, is an alternative to top-k sampling.




Figure 10-4: Nucleus sampling
    Similar to top-k sampling, the goal of nucleus sampling is to balance
diversity and coherence in the output. However, nucleus and top-k
sampling differ in how to select the candidate tokens for sampling at
each step of the generation process. Top-k sampling selects the k most
probable tokens from the probability distribution produced by the
language model, regardless of their probabilities. The value of k remains
fixed throughout the generation process. Nucleus sampling, on the
other hand, selects tokens based on a probability threshold p, as shown
in Figure 10-4. It then accumulates the most probable tokens in
descending order until their cumulative probability meets or exceeds the
threshold p. In contrast to top-k sampling, the size of the candidate set
(nucleus) can vary at each step.
Exercises
10-1. Suppose we train a neural network with top-k or nucleus
      sampling where k and p are hyperparameter choices. Can we
      make the model behave deterministically during inference
      without changing the code?
10-2. In what scenarios might random dropout behavior during
      inference be desired?


References
    For more about different data sampling and model evaluation
    techniques, see my article: “Model Evaluation, Model Selection,
    and Algorithm Selection in Machine Learning” (2018),
    https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.12808.
    The paper that originally proposed the dropout technique: Nitish
    Srivastava et al., “Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural
    Networks from Overfitting” (2014),
    https://jmlr.org/papers/v15/srivastava14a.xhtml.
    A detailed paper on FFT-based convolution: Lu Chi, Borui Jiang,
    and Yadong Mu, “Fast Fourier Convolution” (2020),
    https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.5555/3495724.3496100.
    Details on Winograd-based convolution: Syed Asad Alam et al.,
    “Winograd Convolution for Deep Neural Networks: Efficient
    Point Selection” (2022), https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.10369.
    More information about the deterministic algorithm settings in Py-
    Torch:
    https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.use_deterministic_algorith
    ms.xhtml.
    For details on the deterministic behavior of NVIDIA graphics
    cards, see the “Reproducibility” section of the official NVIDIA
    documentation: https://docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/cudnn/developer-
    guide/index.xhtml#reproducibility.
   PART II
COMPUTER VISION
=================== CHAPTER 27 ===================
                                 27
                       PROPER METRICS




What are the three properties of a distance function that make it a
proper metric?
    Metrics are foundational to mathematics, computer science, and
various other scientific domains. Understanding the fundamental
properties that define a good distance function to measure distances or
differences between points or datasets is important. For instance, when
dealing with functions like loss functions in neural networks,
understanding whether they behave like proper metrics can be
instrumental in knowing how optimization algorithms will converge to
a solution.
    This chapter analyzes two commonly utilized loss functions, the
mean squared error and the cross-entropy loss, to demonstrate whether
they meet the criteria for proper metrics.


The Criteria
To illustrate the criteria of a proper metric, consider two vectors or
points v and w and their distance d(v, w), as shown in Figure 27-1.




Figure 27-1: The Euclidean distance between two 2D vectors
   The criteria of a proper metric are the following:

     The distance between two points is always non-negative, d(v, w) ≥
     0, and can be 0 only if the two points are identical, that is, v = w.
     The distance is symmetric; for instance, d(v, w) = d(w, v).
     The distance function satisfies the triangle inequality for any three
     points: v, w, x, meaning d(v, w) ≤ d(v, x) + d(x, w).

   To better understand the triangle inequality, think of the points as
vertices of a triangle. If we consider any triangle, the sum of two of the
sides is always larger than the third side, as illustrated in Figure 27-2.
Figure 27-2: Triangle inequality
    Consider what would happen if the triangle inequality depicted in
Figure 27-2 weren’t true. If the sum of the lengths of sides AB and BC
was shorter than AC, then sides AB and BC would not meet to form a
triangle; instead, they would fall short of each other. Thus, the fact that
they meet and form a triangle demonstrates the triangle inequality.


The Mean Squared Error
The mean squared error (MSE) loss computes the squared Euclidean
distance between a target variable y and a predicted target value ŷ:




    The index i denotes the ith data point in the dataset or sample. Is
this loss function a proper metric?
    For simplicity’s sake, we will consider the squared error (SE) loss
between two data points (though the following insights also hold for the
MSE). As shown in the following equation, the SE loss quantifies the
squared difference between the predicted and actual values for a single
data point, while the MSE loss averages these squared differences over
all data points in a dataset:
   In this case, the SE satisfies the first part of the first criterion: the
distance between two points is always non-negative. Since we are raising
the difference to the power of 2, it cannot be negative.
   How about the second criterion, that the distance can be 0 only if
the two points are identical? Due to the subtraction in the SE, it is
intuitive to see that it can be 0 only if the prediction matches the target
variable, y = ŷ. As with the first criterion, we can use the square to
confirm that SE satisfies the second criterion: we have (y – ŷ)2 = (ŷ – y)2.
   At first glance, it seems that the squared error loss also satisfies the
third criterion, the triangle inequality. Intuitively, you can check this by
choosing three arbitrary numbers, here 1, 2, 3:

     (1 – 2)2 ≤ (1 – 3)2 + (2 – 3)2
     (1 – 3)2 ≤ (1 – 2)2 + (2 – 3)2
     (2 – 3)2 ≤ (1 – 2)2 + (1 – 3)2

   However, there are values for which this is not true. For example,
consider the values a = 0, b = 2, and c = 1. This gives us d(a, b) = 4, d(a, c)
= 1, and d(b, c) = 1, such that we have the following scenario, which
violates the triangle inequality:

     (0 – 2)2 ≰ (0 – 1)2 + (2 – 1)2
     (2 – 1)2 ≤ (0 –1)2 + (0 – 2)2
     (0 – 1)2 ≤ (0 –2)2 + (1 – 2)2

   Since it does not satisfy the triangle inequality via the example above,
we conclude that the (mean) squared error loss is not a proper metric.
   However, if we change the squared error into the root-squared error
   the triangle inequality can be satisfied:




 NOTE
 You might be familiar with the L2 distance or Euclidean distance, which is
 known to satisfy the triangle inequality. These two distance metrics are
 equivalent to the root-squared error when considering two scalar values.


The Cross-Entropy Loss
Cross entropy is used to measure the distance between two probability
distributions. In machine learning contexts, we use the discrete cross-
entropy loss (CE) between class label y and the predicted probability p
when we train logistic regression or neural network classifiers on a
dataset consisting of n training examples:




   Is this loss function a proper metric? Again, for simplicity’s sake, we
will look at the cross-entropy function (H) between only two data
points:



   The cross-entropy loss satisfies one part of the first criterion: the
distance is always non-negative because the probability score is a
number in the range [0, 1]. Hence, log(p) ranges between –∞ and 0. The
important part is that the H function includes a negative sign. Hence,
the cross entropy ranges between ∞ and 0 and thus satisfies one aspect
of the first criterion shown above.
    However, the cross-entropy loss is not 0 for two identical points. For
example, H(0.9, 0.9) = –0.9 × log(0.9) = 0.095.
    The second criterion shown above is also violated by the cross-
entropy loss because the loss is not symmetric: –y × log(p) ≠ –p × log(y).
Let’s illustrate this with a concrete, numeric example:

     If y = 1 and p = 0.5, then –1 × log(0.5) = 0.693.
     If y = 0.5 and p = 1, then –0.5 × log(1) = 0.

  Finally, the cross-entropy loss does not satisfy the triangle inequality,
H(r, p) ≥ H(r, q) + H(q, p). Let’s illustrate this with an example as well.
Suppose we choose r = 0.9, p = 0.5, and q = 0.4. We have:

     H(0.9, 0.5) = 0.624
     H(0.9, 0.4) = 0.825
     H(0.4, 0.5) = 0.277
As you can see, 0.624 ≥ 0.825 + 0.277 does not hold here.
   In conclusion, while the cross-entropy loss is a useful loss function
for training neural networks via (stochastic) gradient descent, it is not a
proper distance metric, as it does not satisfy any of the three criteria.


Exercises
27-1. Suppose we consider using the mean absolute error (MAE) as an
      alternative to the root mean square error (RMSE) for measuring
      the performance of a machine learning model, where
                                        and

                                             . However, a colleague
      argues that the MAE is not a proper distance metric in metric
      space because it involves an absolute value, so we should use the
      RMSE instead. Is this argument correct?
27-2. Based on your answer to the previous question, would you say
      that the MAE is better or is worse than the RMSE?
