                                     2
                 SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING




What is self-supervised learning, when is it useful, and what are the
main approaches to implementing it?
   Self-supervised learning is a pretraining procedure that lets neural
networks leverage large, unlabeled datasets in a supervised fashion. This
chapter compares self-supervised learning to transfer learning, a related
method for pretraining neural networks, and discusses the practical
applications of self-supervised learning. Finally, it outlines the main
categories of self-supervised learning.


Self-Supervised Learning vs. Transfer Learning
Self-supervised learning is related to transfer learning, a technique in
which a model pretrained on one task is reused as the starting point for
a model on a second task. For example, suppose we are interested in
training an image classifier to classify bird species. In transfer learning,
we would pretrain a convolutional neural network on the ImageNet
dataset, a large, labeled image dataset with many different categories,
including various objects and animals. After pretraining on the general
ImageNet dataset, we would take that pretrained model and train it on
the smaller, more specific target dataset that contains the bird species of
interest. (Often, we just have to change the class-specific output layer,
but we can otherwise adopt the pretrained network as is.)
   Figure 2-1 illustrates the process of transfer learning.




Figure 2-1: Pretraining with conventional transfer learning
   Self-supervised learning is an alternative approach to transfer
learning in which the model is pretrained not on labeled data but on
unlabeled data. We consider an unlabeled dataset for which we do not
have label information, and then we find a way to obtain labels from the
dataset’s structure to formulate a prediction task for the neural network,
as illustrated in Figure 2-2. These self-supervised training tasks are also
called pretext tasks.




Figure 2-2: Pretraining with self-supervised learning
    The main difference between transfer learning and self-supervised
learning lies in how we obtain the labels during step 1 in Figures 2-1
and 2-2. In transfer learning, we assume that the labels are provided
along with the data-set; they are typically created by human labelers. In
self-supervised learning, the labels can be directly derived from the
training examples.
    A self-supervised learning task could be a missing-word prediction in
a natural language processing context. For example, given the sentence
“It is beautiful and sunny outside,” we can mask out the word sunny,
feed the network the input “It is beautiful and [MASK] outside,” and
have the network predict the missing word in the “[MASK]” location.
Similarly, we could remove image patches in a computer vision context
and have the neural network fill in the blanks. These are just two
examples of self-supervised learning tasks; many more methods and
paradigms for this type of learning exist.
    In sum, we can think of self-supervised learning on the pretext task
as representation learning. We can take the pretrained model to fine-tune
it on the target task (also known as the downstream task).


Leveraging Unlabeled Data
Large neural network architectures require large amounts of labeled
data to perform and generalize well. However, for many problem areas,
we don’t have access to large labeled datasets. With self-supervised
learning, we can leverage unlabeled data. Hence, self-supervised
learning is likely to be useful when working with large neural networks
and with a limited quantity of labeled training data.
    Transformer-based architectures that form the basis of LLMs and
vision transformers are known to require self-supervised learning for
pretraining to perform well.
    For small neural network models such as multilayer perceptrons with
two or three layers, self-supervised learning is typically considered
neither useful nor necessary.
    Self-supervised learning likewise isn’t useful in traditional machine
learning with nonparametric models such as tree-based random forests
or gradient boosting. Conventional tree-based methods do not have a
fixed parameter structure (in contrast to the weight matrices, for
example). Thus, conventional tree-based methods are not capable of
transfer learning and are incompatible with self-supervised learning.
Self-Prediction and Contrastive Self-Supervised
Learning
There are two main categories of self-supervised learning: self-
prediction and contrastive self-supervised learning. In self-prediction,
illustrated in Figure 2-3, we typically change or hide parts of the input
and train the model to reconstruct the original inputs, such as by using a
perturbation mask that obfuscates certain pixels in an image.




Figure 2-3: Self-prediction after applying a perturbation mask
   A classic example is a denoising autoencoder that learns to remove
noise from an input image. Alternatively, consider a masked
autoencoder that reconstructs the missing parts of an image, as shown
in Figure 2-4.
Figure 2-4: A masked autoencoder reconstructing a masked image
    Missing (masked) input self-prediction methods are also commonly
used in natural language processing contexts. Many generative LLMs,
such as GPT, are trained on a next-word prediction pretext task (GPT
will be discussed at greater length in Chapters 14 and 17). Here, we
feed the network text fragments, where it has to predict the next word
in the sequence (as we’ll discuss further in Chapter 17).
    In contrastive self-supervised learning, we train the neural network to
learn an embedding space where similar inputs are close to each other
and dissimilar inputs are far apart. In other words, we train the network
to produce embeddings that minimize the distance between similar
training inputs and maximize the distance between dissimilar training
examples.
    Let’s discuss contrastive learning using concrete example inputs.
Suppose we have a dataset consisting of random animal images. First,
we draw a random image of a cat (the network does not know the label,
because we assume that the dataset is unlabeled). We then augment,
corrupt, or perturb this cat image, such as by adding a random noise
layer and cropping it differently, as shown in Figure 2-5.
Figure 2-5: Image pairs encountered in contrastive learning
   The perturbed cat image in this figure still shows the same cat, so we
want the network to produce a similar embedding vector. We also
consider a random image drawn from the training set (for example, an
elephant, but again, the network doesn’t know the label).
   For the cat-elephant pair, we want the network to produce dissimilar
embeddings. This way, we implicitly force the network to capture the
image’s core content while being somewhat agnostic to small differences
and noise. For example, the simplest form of a contrastive loss is the L2-
norm (Euclidean distance) between the embeddings produced by model
M(·). Let’s say we update the model weights to decrease the distance
||M(cat) – M(cat′)||2 and increase the distance ||M(cat) –
M(elephant)||2.
   Figure 2-6 summarizes the central concept behind contrastive
learning for the perturbed image scenario. The model is shown twice,
which is known as a siamese network setup. Essentially, the same model is
utilized in two instances: first, to generate the embedding for the
original training example, and second, to produce the embedding for
the perturbed version of the sample.




Figure 2-6: Contrastive learning
   This example outlines the main idea behind contrastive learning, but
many subvariants exist. Broadly, we can categorize these into sample
contrastive and dimension contrastive methods. The elephant-cat
example in Figure 2-6 illustrates a sample contrastive method, where we
focus on learning embeddings to minimize and maximize distances
between training pairs. In dimension-contrastive approaches, on the
other hand, we focus on making only certain variables in the embedding
representations of similar training pairs appear close to each other while
maximizing the distance of others.


Exercises
2-1. How could we apply self-supervised learning to video data?
2-2. Can self-supervised learning be used for tabular data represented as
     rows and columns? If so, how could we approach this?
References
   For more on the ImageNet dataset:
   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ImageNet.
   An example of a contrastive self-supervised learning method: Ting
   Chen et al., “A Simple Framework for Contrastive Learning of
   Visual Representations” (2020), https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05709.
   An example of a dimension-contrastive method: Adrien Bardes,
   Jean Ponce, and Yann LeCun, “VICRegL: Self-Supervised
   Learning of Local Visual Features” (2022),
   https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.01571.
   If you plan to employ self-supervised learning in practice: Randall
   Balestriero et al., “A Cookbook of Self-Supervised Learning”
   (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.12210.
   A paper proposing a method of transfer learning and self-
   supervised learning for relatively small multilayer perceptrons on
   tabular datasets: Dara Bahri et al., “SCARF: Self-Supervised
   Contrastive Learning Using Random Feature Corruption” (2021),
   https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.15147.
   A second paper proposing such a method: Roman Levin et al.,
   “Transfer Learning with Deep Tabular Models” (2022),
   https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.15306.
                                    5
           REDUCING OVERFITTING WITH DATA




Suppose we train a neural network classifier in a supervised fashion and
notice that it suffers from overfitting. What are some of the common
ways to reduce overfitting in neural networks through the use of altered
or additional data?
   Overfitting, a common problem in machine learning, occurs when a
model fits the training data too closely, learning its noise and outliers
rather than the underlying pattern. As a result, the model performs well
on the training data but poorly on unseen or test data. While it is ideal
to prevent overfitting, it’s often not possible to completely eliminate it.
Instead, we aim to reduce or minimize overfitting as much as possible.
   The most successful techniques for reducing overfitting revolve
around collecting more high-quality labeled data. However, if collecting
more labeled data is not feasible, we can augment the existing data or
leverage unlabeled data for pretraining.


Common Methods
This chapter summarizes the most prominent examples of dataset-
related techniques that have stood the test of time, grouping them into
the following categories: collecting more data, data augmentation, and
pretraining.

Collecting More Data
One of the best ways to reduce overfitting is to collect more (good-
quality) data. We can plot learning curves to find out whether a given
model would benefit from more data. To construct a learning curve, we
train the model to different training set sizes (10 percent, 20 percent,
and so on) and evaluate the trained model on the same fixed-size
validation or test set. As shown in Figure 5-1, the validation accuracy
increases as the training set sizes increase. This indicates that we can
improve the model’s performance by collecting more data.




Figure 5-1: The learning curve plot of a model fit to different training set sizes
   The gap between training and validation performance indicates the
degree of overfitting—the more extensive the gap, the more overfitting
occurs. Conversely, the slope indicating an improvement in the
validation performance suggests the model is underfitting and can
benefit from more data. Typically, additional data can decrease both
underfitting and overfitting.

Data Augmentation
Data augmentation refers to generating new data records or features
based on existing data. It allows for the expansion of a dataset without
additional data collection.
   Data augmentation allows us to create different versions of the
original input data, which can improve the model’s generalization
performance. Why? Augmented data can help the model improve its
ability to generalize, since it makes it harder to memorize spurious
information via training examples or features—or, in the case of image
data, exact pixel values for specific pixel locations. Figure 5-2 highlights
common image data augmentation techniques, including increasing
brightness, flipping, and cropping.
Figure 5-2: A selection of different image data augmentation techniques
   Data augmentation is usually standard for image data (see Figure 5-
2) and text data (discussed further in Chapter 15), but data
augmentation methods for tabular data also exist.
   Instead of collecting more data or augmenting existing data, it is also
possible to generate new, synthetic data. While more common for
image data and text, generating synthetic data is also possible for tabular
datasets.

Pretraining
As discussed in Chapter 2, self-supervised learning lets us leverage large,
unlabeled datasets to pretrain neural networks. This can also help
reduce over-fitting on the smaller target datasets.
   As an alternative to self-supervised learning, traditional transfer
learning on large labeled datasets is also an option. Transfer learning is
most effective if the labeled dataset is closely related to the target
domain. For instance, if we train a model to classify bird species, we can
pretrain a network on a large, general animal classification dataset.
However, if such a large animal classification dataset is unavailable, we
can also pretrain the model on the relatively broad ImageNet dataset.
   A dataset may be extremely small and unsuitable for supervised
learning—for example, if it contains only a handful of labeled examples
per class. If our classifier needs to operate in a context where the
collection of additional labeled data is not feasible, we may also consider
few-shot learning.


Other Methods
The previous sections covered the main approaches to using and
modifying datasets to reduce overfitting. However, this is not an
exhaustive list. Other common techniques include:

    Feature engineering and normalization
    The inclusion of adversarial examples and label or feature noise
    Label smoothing
    Smaller batch sizes
    Data augmentation techniques such as Mixup, Cutout, and CutMix

   The next chapter covers additional techniques to reduce overfitting
from a model perspective, and it concludes by discussing which
regularization techniques we should consider in practice.


Exercises
5-1. Suppose we train an XGBoost model to classify images based on
     manually extracted features obtained from collaborators. The
     dataset of labeled training examples is relatively small, but
     fortunately, our collaborators also have a labeled training set from
     an older project on a related domain. We’re considering
     implementing a transfer learning approach to train the XGBoost
     model. Is this a feasible option? If so, how could we do it? (Assume
     we are allowed to use only XGBoost and not another classification
     algorithm or model.)
5-2. Suppose we’re working on the image classification problem of
     implementing MNIST-based handwritten digit recognition. We’ve
     added a decent amount of data augmentation to try to reduce
     overfitting. Unfortunately, we find that the classification accuracy is
     much worse than it was before the augmentation. What are some
     potential reasons for this?


References
    A paper on data augmentation for tabular data: Derek Snow,
    “DeltaPy: A Framework for Tabular Data Augmentation in
    Python” (2020), https://github.com/firmai/deltapy.
    The paper proposing the GReaT method for generating synthetic
    tabular data using an auto-regressive generative large language
    model: Vadim Borisov et al., “Language Models Are Realistic
    Tabular Data Generators” (2022), https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.06280.
    The paper proposing the TabDDPM method for generating
    synthetic tabular data using a diffusion model: Akim Kotelnikov et
    al., “TabDDPM: Modelling Tabular Data with Diffusion Models”
    (2022), https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.15421.
    Scikit-learn’s user guide offers a section on preprocessing data,
    featuring techniques like feature scaling and normalization that can
    enhance your model’s performance: https://scikit-
    learn.org/stable/modules/preprocessing.xhtml.
                                   11
     CALCULATING THE NUMBER OF PARAMETERS




How do we compute the number of parameters in a convolutional
neural network, and why is this information useful?
    Knowing the number of parameters in a model helps gauge the
model’s size, which affects storage and memory requirements. The
following sections will explain how to compute the convolutional and
fully connected layer parameter counts.


How to Find Parameter Counts
Suppose we are working with a convolutional network that has two
convolutional layers with kernel size 5 and kernel size 3, respectively.
The first convolutional layer has 3 input channels and 5 output
channels, and the second one has 5 input channels and 12 output
channels. The stride of these convolutional layers is 1. Furthermore, the
network has two pooling layers, one with a kernel size of 3 and a stride
of 2, and another with a kernel size of 5 and a stride of 2. It also has two
fully connected hidden layers with 192 and 128 hidden units each,
where the output layer is a classification layer for 10 classes. The
architecture of this network is illustrated in Figure 11-1.




Figure 11-1: A convolutional neural network with two convolutional and two fully connected
layers
   What is the number of trainable parameters in this convolutional
network? We can approach this problem from left to right, computing
the number of parameters for each layer and then summing up these
counts to obtain the total number of parameters. Each layer’s number of
trainable parameters consists of weights and bias units.

Convolutional Layers
In a convolutional layer, the number of weights depends on the kernel’s
width and height and the number of input and output channels. The
number of bias units depends on the number of output channels only.
To illustrate the computation step by step, suppose we have a kernel
width and height of 5, one input channel, and one output channel, as
illustrated in Figure 11-2.




Figure 11-2: A convolutional layer with one input channel and one output channel
   In this case, we have 26 parameters, since we have 5 × 5 = 25 weights
via the kernel plus the bias unit. The computation to determine an
output value or pixel z is z = b + ∑j wj xj, where xj represents an input
pixel, wj represents a weight parameter of the kernel, and b is the bias
unit.
   Now, suppose we have three input channels, as illustrated in Figure
11-3.




Figure 11-3: A convolutional layer with three input channels and one output channel
   In that case, we compute the output value by performing the
aforementioned operation, ∑j wj xj, for each input channel and then add
the bias unit. For three input channels, this would involve three
different kernels with three sets of weights:




    Since we have three sets of weights (w(1), w(2), and w(3) for j = [1, . . . ,
25]), we have 3 × 25 + 1 = 76 parameters in this convolutional layer.
    We use one kernel for each output channel, where each kernel is
unique to a given output channel. Thus, if we extend the number of
output channels from one to five, as shown in Figure 11-4, we extend
the number of parameters by a factor of 5. In other words, if the kernel
for one output channel has 76 parameters, the 5 kernels required for the
five output channels will have 5 × 76 = 380 parameters.




Figure 11-4: A convolutional layer with three input channels and five output channels
   Returning to the neural network architecture illustrated in Figure
11-1 at the beginning of this section, we compute the number of
parameters in the convolutional layers based on the kernel size and
number of input and output channels. For example, the first
convolutional layer has three input channels, five output channels, and a
kernel size of 5. Thus, its number of parameters is 5 × (5 × 5 × 3) + 5 =
380. The second convolutional layer, with five input channels, 12 output
channels, and a kernel size of 3, has 12 × (3 × 3 × 5) + 12 = 552
parameters. Since the pooling layers do not have any trainable
parameters, we can count 380 + 552 = 932 for the convolutional part of
this architecture.
    Next, let’s see how we can compute the number of parameters of
fully connected layers.

Fully Connected Layers
Counting the number of parameters in a fully connected layer is
relatively straightforward. A fully connected node connects each input
node to each output node, so the number of weights is the number of
inputs times the number of outputs plus the bias units added to the
output. For example, if we have a fully connected layer with five inputs
and three outputs, as shown in Figure 11-5, we have 5 × 3 = 15 weights
and three bias units, that is, 18 parameters total.
Figure 11-5: A fully connected layer with five inputs and three outputs
    Returning once more to the neural network architecture illustrated
in Figure 11-1, we can now calculate the parameters in the fully
connected layers as follows: 192 × 128 + 128 = 24,704 in the first fully
connected layer and 128 × 10 + 10 = 1,290 in the second fully connected
layer, the output layer. Hence, we have 24,704 + 1,290 = 25,994 in the
fully connected part of this network. After adding the 932 parameters
from the convolutional layers and the 25,994 parameters from the fully
connected layers, we can conclude that this network’s total number of
parameters is 26,926.
    As a bonus, interested readers can find PyTorch code to compute the
number of parameters programmatically in the supplementary/q11-conv-
size subfolder at https://github.com/rasbt/MachineLearning-QandAI-book.
Practical Applications
Why do we care about the number of parameters at all? First, we can
use this number to estimate a model’s complexity. As a rule of thumb,
the more parameters there are, the more training data we’ll need to
train the model well.
   The number of parameters also lets us estimate the size of the neural
network, which in turn helps us estimate whether the network can fit
into GPU memory. Although the memory requirement during training
often exceeds the model size due to the additional memory required for
carrying out matrix multiplications and storing gradients, model size
gives us a ballpark sense of whether training the model on a given
hardware setup is feasible.


Exercises
11-1. Suppose we want to optimize the neural network using a plain
      stochastic gradient descent (SGD) optimizer or the popular Adam
      optimizer. What are the respective numbers of parameters that
      need to be stored for SGD and Adam?
11-2. Suppose we’re adding three batch normalization (BatchNorm)
      layers: one after the first convolutional layer, one after the second
      convolutional layer, and another one after the first fully connected
      layer (we typically do not want to add BatchNorm layers to the
      output layer). How many additional parameters do these three
      BatchNorm layers add to the model?
                                  12
  FULLY CONNECTED AND CONVOLUTIONAL LAYERS




Under which circumstances can we replace fully connected layers with
convolutional layers to perform the same computation?
    Replacing fully connected layers with convolutional layers can offer
advantages in terms of hardware optimization, such as by utilizing
specialized hardware accelerators for convolution operations. This can
be particularly relevant for edge devices.
    There are exactly two scenarios in which fully connected layers and
convolutional layers are equivalent: when the size of the convolutional
filter is equal to the size of the receptive field and when the size of the
convolutional filter is 1. As an illustration of these two scenarios,
consider a fully connected layer with two input and four output units, as
shown in Figure 12-1.
Figure 12-1: Four inputs and two outputs connected via eight weight parameters
   The fully connected layer in this figure consists of eight weights and
two bias units. We can compute the output nodes via the following dot
products:

   Node 1 w1,1 × x1 + w1,2 × x2 + w1,3 × x3 + w1,4 × x4 + b1

   Node 2 w2,1 × x1 + w2,2 × x2 + w2,3 × x3 + w2,4 × x4 + b2

   The following two sections illustrate scenarios in which
convolutional layers can be defined to produce exactly the same
computation as the fully connected layer described.


When the Kernel and Input Sizes Are Equal
Let’s start with the first scenario, where the size of the convolutional
filter is equal to the size of the receptive field. Recall from Chapter 11
how we compute a number of parameters in a convolutional kernel with
one input channel and multiple output channels. We have a kernel size
of 2×2, one input channel, and two output channels. The input size is
also 2×2, a reshaped version of the four inputs depicted in Figure 12-2.
Figure 12-2: A convolutional layer with a 2×2 kernel that equals the input size and two
output channels
    If the convolutional kernel dimensions equal the input size, as
depicted in Figure 12-2, there is no sliding window mechanism in the
convolutional layer. For the first output channel, we have the following
set of weights:




   For the second output channel, we have the following set of weights:




   If the inputs are organized as
we calculate the first output channel as o1 = ∑i(W1 *x)i + b1, where the
convolutional operator * is equal to an element-wise multiplication. In
other words, we perform an element-wise multiplication between two
matrices, W1 and x, and then compute the output as the sum over these
elements; this equals the dot product in the fully connected layer.
Lastly, we add the bias unit. The computation for the second output
channel works analogously: o2 = ∑i(W2 * x)i + b2.
   As a bonus, the supplementary materials for this book include
PyTorch code to show this equivalence with a hands-on example in the
supplementary/q12-fc-cnn-equivalence subfolder at
https://github.com/rasbt/MachineLearning-QandAI-book.

When the Kernel Size Is 1
The second scenario assumes that we reshape the input into an input
“image” with 1×1 dimensions where the number of “color channels”
equals the number of input features, as depicted in Figure 12-3.




Figure 12-3: The number of output nodes equals the number of channels if the kernel size is
equal to the input size.
   Each kernel consists of a stack of weights equal to the number of
input channels. For instance, for the first output layer, the weights are
while the weights for the second channel are:




   To get a better intuitive understanding of this computation, check
out the illustrations in Chapter 11, which describe how to compute the
parameters in a convolutional layer.


Recommendations
The fact that fully connected layers can be implemented as equivalent
convolutional layers does not have immediate performance or other
advantages on standard computers. However, replacing fully connected
layers with convolutional layers can offer advantages in combination
with developing specialized hardware accelerators for convolution
operations.
   Moreover, understanding the scenarios where fully connected layers
are equivalent to convolutional layers aids in understanding the
mechanics of these layers. It also lets us implement convolutional neural
networks without any use of fully connected layers, if desired, to
simplify code implementations.


Exercises
12-1. How would increasing the stride affect the equivalence discussed
      in this chapter?
12-2. Does padding affect the equivalence between fully connected
      layers and convolutional layers?
                                 13
LARGE TRAINING SETS FOR VISION TRANSFORMERS




Why do vision transformers (ViTs) generally require larger training sets
than convolutional neural networks (CNNs)?
   Each machine learning algorithm and model encodes a particular set
of assumptions or prior knowledge, commonly referred to as inductive
biases, in its design. Some inductive biases are workarounds to make
algorithms computationally more feasible, other inductive biases are
based on domain knowledge, and some inductive biases are both.
   CNNs and ViTs can be used for the same tasks, including image
classification, object detection, and image segmentation. CNNs are
mainly composed of convolutional layers, while ViTs consist primarily
of multi-head attention blocks (discussed in Chapter 8 in the context of
transformers for natural language inputs).
   CNNs have more inductive biases that are hardcoded as part of the
algorithmic design, so they generally require less training data than
ViTs. In a sense, ViTs are given more degrees of freedom and can or
must learn certain inductive biases from the data (assuming that these
biases are conducive to optimizing the training objective). However,
everything that needs to be learned requires more training examples.
   The following sections explain the main inductive biases
encountered in CNNs and how ViTs work well without them.


Inductive Biases in CNNs
The following are the primary inductive biases that largely define how
CNNs function:
  Local connectivity In CNNs, each unit in a hidden layer is
  connected to only a subset of neurons in the previous layer. We can
  justify this restriction by assuming that neighboring pixels are more
  relevant to each other than pixels that are farther apart. As an
  intuitive example, consider how this assumption applies to the
  context of recognizing edges or contours in an image.
  Weight sharing Via the convolutional layers, we use the same small
  set of weights (the kernels or filters) throughout the whole image.
  This reflects the assumption that the same filters are useful for
  detecting the same patterns in different parts of the image.
  Hierarchical processing CNNs consist of multiple convolutional
  layers to extract features from the input image. As the network
  progresses from the input to the output layers, low-level features are
  successively combined to form increasingly complex features,
  ultimately leading to the recognition of more complex objects and
  shapes. Furthermore, the convolutional filters in these layers learn to
  detect specific patterns and features at different levels of abstraction.
  Spatial invariance CNNs exhibit the mathematical property of
  spatial invariance, meaning the output of a model remains consistent
  even if the input signal is shifted to a different location within the
  spatial domain. This characteristic arises from the combination of
  local connectivity, weight sharing, and the hierarchical architecture
  mentioned earlier.
    The combination of local connectivity, weight sharing, and
hierarchical processing in a CNN leads to spatial invariance, allowing
the model to recognize the same pattern or feature regardless of its
location in the input image.
    Translation invariance is a specific case of spatial invariance in which
the output remains the same after a shift or translation of the input
signal in the spatial domain. In this context, the emphasis is solely on
moving an object to a different location within an image without any
rotations or alterations of its other attributes.
    In reality, convolutional layers and networks are not truly
translation-invariant; rather, they achieve a certain level of translation
equivariance. What is the difference between translation invariance and
equivariance? Translation invariance means that the output does not
change with an input shift, while translation equivariance implies that the
output shifts with the input in a corresponding manner. In other words,
if we shift the input object to the right, the results will correspondingly
shift to the right, as illustrated in Figure 13-1.




Figure 13-1: Equivariance under different image translations
   As Figure 13-1 shows, under translation invariance, we get the same
output pattern regardless of the order in which we apply the operations:
transformation followed by translation or translation followed by
transformation.
   As mentioned earlier, CNNs achieve translation equivariance
through a combination of their local connectivity, weight sharing, and
hierarchical processing properties. Figure 13-2 depicts a convolutional
operation to illustrate the local connectivity and weight-sharing priors.
This figure demonstrates the concept of translation equivariance in
CNNs, in which a convolutional filter captures the input signal (the two
dark blocks) irrespective of where it is located in the input.




Figure 13-2: Convolutional filters and translation equivariance
   Figure 13-2 shows a 3×3 input image that consists of two nonzero
pixel values in the upper-left corner (top portion of the figure) or upper-
right corner (bottom portion of the figure). If we apply a 2×2
convolutional filter to these two input image scenarios, we can see that
the output feature maps contain the same extracted pattern, which is on
either the left (top of the figure) or the right (bottom of the figure),
demonstrating the translation equivariance of the convolutional
operation.
    For comparison, a fully connected network such as a multilayer
perceptron lacks this spatial invariance or equivariance. To illustrate this
point, picture a multilayer perceptron with one hidden layer. Each pixel
in the input image is connected with each value in the resulting output.
If we shift the input by one or more pixels, a different set of weights will
be activated, as illustrated in Figure 13-3.




Figure 13-3: Location-specific weights in fully connected layers
   Like fully connected networks, ViT architecture (and transformer
architecture in general) lacks the inductive bias for spatial invariance or
equi-variance. For instance, the model produces different outputs if we
place the same object in two different spatial locations within an image.
This is not ideal, as the semantic meaning of an object (the concept that
an object represents or conveys) remains the same based on its location.
Consequently, it must learn these invariances directly from the data. To
facilitate learning useful patterns present in CNNs requires pretraining
over a larger dataset.
    A common workaround for adding positional information in ViTs is
to use relative positional embeddings (also known as relative positional
encodings) that consider the relative distance between two tokens in the
input sequence. However, while relative embeddings encode
information that helps transformers keep track of the relative location
of tokens, the transformer still needs to learn from the data whether and
how far spatial information is relevant for the task at hand.


ViTs Can Outperform CNNs
The hardcoded assumptions via the inductive biases discussed in
previous sections reduce the number of parameters in CNNs
substantially compared to fully connected layers. On the other hand,
ViTs tend to have larger numbers of parameters than CNNs, which
require more training data. (Refer to Chapter 11 for a refresher on how
to precisely calculate the number of parameters in fully connected and
convolutional layers.)
   ViTs may underperform compared to popular CNN architectures
without extensive pretraining, but they can perform very well with a
sufficiently large pretraining dataset. In contrast to language
transformers, where unsupervised pretraining (such as self-supervised
learning, discussed in Chapter 2) is a preferred choice, vision
transformers are often pretrained using large, labeled datasets like
ImageNet, which provides millions of labeled images for training, and
regular supervised learning.
   An example of ViTs surpassing the predictive performance of CNNs,
given enough data, can be observed from initial research on the ViT
architecture, as shown in the paper “An Image Is Worth 16x16 Words:
Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale.” This study compared
ResNet, a type of convolutional network, with the original ViT design
using different dataset sizes for pretraining. The findings also showed
that the ViT model excelled over the convolutional approach only after
being pretrained on a minimum of 100 million images.


Inductive Biases in ViTs
ViTs also possess some inductive biases. For example, vision
transformers patchify the input image to process each input patch
individually. Here, each patch can attend to all other patches so that the
model learns relationships between far-apart patches in the input image,
as illustrated in Figure 13-4.
Figure 13-4: How a vision transformer operates on image patches
    The patchify inductive bias allows ViTs to scale to larger image sizes
without increasing the number of parameters in the model, which can
be computationally expensive. By processing smaller patches
individually, ViTs can efficiently capture spatial relationships between
image regions while benefiting from the global context captured by the
self-attention mechanism.
    This raises another question: how and what do ViTs learn from the
training data? ViTs learn more uniform feature representations across
all layers, with self-attention mechanisms enabling early aggregation of
global information. In addition, the residual connections in ViTs
strongly propagate features from lower to higher layers, in contrast to
the more hierarchical structure of CNNs.
    ViTs tend to focus more on global than local relationships because
their self-attention mechanism allows the model to consider long-range
dependencies between different parts of the input image. Consequently,
the self-attention layers in ViTs are often considered low-pass filters
that focus more on shapes and curvature.
    In contrast, the convolutional layers in CNNs are often considered
high-pass filters that focus more on texture. However, keep in mind that
convolutional layers can act as both high-pass and low-pass filters,
depending on the learned filters at each layer. High-pass filters detect an
image’s edges, fine details, and texture, while low-pass filters capture
more global, smooth features and shapes. CNNs achieve this by
applying convolutional kernels of varying sizes and learning different
filters at each layer.


Recommendations
ViTs have recently begun outperforming CNNs if enough data is
available for pretraining. However, this doesn’t make CNNs obsolete, as
methods such as the popular EfficientNetV2 CNN architecture are less
memory and data hungry.
    Moreover, recent ViT architectures don’t rely solely on large
datasets, parameter numbers, and self-attention. Instead, they have
taken inspiration from CNNs and added soft convolutional inductive
biases or even complete convolutional layers to get the best of both
worlds.
    In short, vision transformer architectures without convolutional
layers generally have fewer spatial and locality inductive biases than
convolutional neural networks. Consequently, vision transformers need
to learn data-related concepts such as local relationships among pixels.
Thus, vision transformers require more training data to achieve good
predictive performance and produce acceptable visual representations in
generative modeling contexts.
Exercises
13-1. Consider the patchification of the input images shown in Figure
      13-4. The size of the resulting patches controls a computational
      and predictive performance trade-off. The optimal patch size
      depends on the application and desired trade-off between
      computational cost and model performance. Do smaller patches
      typically result in higher or lower computational costs?
13-2. Following up on the previous question, do smaller patches
      typically lead to a higher or lower prediction accuracy?


References
    The paper proposing the original vision transformer model: Alexey
    Dosovitskiy et al., “An Image Is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers
    for Image Recognition at Scale” (2020),
    https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929.
    A workaround for adding positional information in ViTs is to use
    relative positional embeddings: Peter Shaw, Jakob Uszkoreit, and
    Ashish Vaswani, “Self-Attention with Relative Position
    Representations” (2018), https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.02155.
    Residual connections in ViTs strongly propagate features from
    lower to higher layers, in contrast to the more hierarchical
    structure of CNNs: Maithra Raghu et al., “Do Vision Transformers
    See Like Convolutional Neural Networks?” (2021),
    https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.08810.
    A detailed research article covering the EfficientNetV2 CNN
    architecture: Mingxing Tan and Quoc V. Le, “EfficientNetV2:
    Smaller Models and Faster Training” (2021),
    https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.00298.
    A ViT architecture that also incorporates convolutional layers:
    Stéphane d’Ascoli et al., “ConViT: Improving Vision Transformers
    with Soft Convolutional Inductive Biases” (2021),
    https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.10697.
Another example of a ViT using convolutional layers: Haiping Wu
et al., “CvT: Introducing Convolutions to Vision Transformers”
(2021), https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.15808.
