                                    4
            THE LOTTERY TICKET HYPOTHESIS




What is the lottery ticket hypothesis, and, if it holds true, how is it
useful in practice?
   The lottery ticket hypothesis is a concept in neural network training
that posits that within a randomly initialized neural network, there
exists a subnetwork (or “winning ticket”) that can, when trained
separately, achieve the same accuracy on a test set as the full network
after being trained for the same number of steps. This idea was first
proposed by Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin in 2018.
   This chapter illustrates the lottery hypothesis step by step, then goes
over weight pruning, one of the key techniques to create smaller
subnetworks as part of the lottery hypothesis methodology. Lastly, it
discusses the practical implications and limitations of the hypothesis.


The Lottery Ticket Training Procedure
Figure 4-1 illustrates the training procedure for the lottery ticket
hypothesis in four steps, which we’ll discuss one by one to help clarify
the concept.




Figure 4-1: The lottery hypothesis training procedure

    In Figure 4-1, we start with a large neural network ➊ that we train
until convergence ➋, meaning we put in our best efforts to make it
perform as well as possible on a target dataset (for example, minimizing
training loss and maximizing classification accuracy). This large neural
network is initialized as usual using small random weights.
    Next, as shown in Figure 4-1, we prune the neural network’s weight
parameters ➌, removing them from the network. We can do this by
setting the weights to zero to create sparse weight matrices. Here, we
can either prune individual weights, known as unstructured pruning, or
prune larger “chunks” from the network, such as entire convolutional
filter channels. This is known as structured pruning.
    The original lottery hypothesis approach follows a concept known as
iterative magnitude pruning, where the weights with the lowest
magnitudes are removed in an iterative fashion. (We will revisit this
concept in Chapter 6 when discussing techniques to reduce overfitting.)
    After the pruning step, we reset the weights to the original small
random values used in step 1 in Figure 4-1 and train the pruned
network ➍. It’s worth emphasizing that we do not reinitialize the
pruned network with any small random weights (as is typical for
iterative magnitude pruning), and instead we reuse the weights from
step 1.
    We then repeat the pruning steps 2 through 4 until we reach the
desired network size. For example, in the original lottery ticket
hypothesis paper, the authors successfully reduced the network to 10
percent of its original size without sacrificing classification accuracy. As
a nice bonus, the pruned (sparse) network, referred to as the winning
ticket, even demonstrated improved generalization performance
compared to the original (large and dense) network.


Practical Implications and Limitations
If it’s possible to identify smaller subnetworks that have the same
predictive performance as their up-to-10-times-larger counterparts, this
can have significant implications for both neural training and inference.
Given the ever-growing size of modern neural network architectures,
this can help cut training costs and infrastructure.
    Sound too good to be true? Maybe. If winning tickets can be
identified efficiently, this would be very useful in practice. However, at
the time of writing, there is no way to find the winning tickets without
training the original network. Including the pruning steps would make
this even more expensive than a regular training procedure. Moreover,
after the publication of the original paper, researchers found that the
original weight initialization may not work to find winning tickets for
larger-scale networks, and additional experimentation with the initial
weights of the pruned networks is required.
    The good news is that winning tickets do exist. Even if it’s currently
not possible to identify them without training their larger neural
network counterparts, they can be used for more efficient inference
after training.


Exercises
4-1. Suppose we’re trying out the lottery ticket hypothesis approach
     and find that the performance of the subnetwork is not very good
     (compared to the original network). What next steps might we try?
4-2. The simplicity and efficiency of the rectified linear unit (ReLU)
     activation function have made it one of the most popular activation
     functions in neural network training, particularly in deep learning,
     where it helps to mitigate problems like the vanishing gradient.
     The ReLU activation function is defined by the mathematical
     expression max(0, x). This means that if the input x is positive, the
     function returns x, but if the input is negative or 0, the function
     returns 0. How is the lottery ticket hypothesis related to training a
     neural network with ReLU activation functions?


References
    The paper proposing the lottery ticket hypothesis: Jonathan Fran-
    kle and Michael Carbin, “The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis: Finding
    Sparse, Trainable Neural Networks” (2018),
    https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.03635.
    The paper proposing structured pruning for removing larger parts,
    such as entire convolutional filters, from a network: Hao Li et al.,
    “Pruning Filters for Efficient ConvNets” (2016),
    https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.08710.
    Follow-up work on the lottery hypothesis, showing that the
    original weight initialization may not work to find winning tickets
    for larger-scale networks, and additional experimentation with the
    initial weights of the pruned networks is required: Jonathan
    Frankle et al., “Linear Mode Connectivity and the Lottery Ticket
    Hypothesis” (2019), https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.05671.
    An improved lottery ticket hypothesis algorithm that finds smaller
    networks that match the performance of a larger network exactly:
    Vivek Ramanujan et al., “What’s Hidden in a Randomly Weighted
    Neural Network?” (2020), https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.13299.
                                    5
           REDUCING OVERFITTING WITH DATA




Suppose we train a neural network classifier in a supervised fashion and
notice that it suffers from overfitting. What are some of the common
ways to reduce overfitting in neural networks through the use of altered
or additional data?
   Overfitting, a common problem in machine learning, occurs when a
model fits the training data too closely, learning its noise and outliers
rather than the underlying pattern. As a result, the model performs well
on the training data but poorly on unseen or test data. While it is ideal
to prevent overfitting, it’s often not possible to completely eliminate it.
Instead, we aim to reduce or minimize overfitting as much as possible.
   The most successful techniques for reducing overfitting revolve
around collecting more high-quality labeled data. However, if collecting
more labeled data is not feasible, we can augment the existing data or
leverage unlabeled data for pretraining.


Common Methods
This chapter summarizes the most prominent examples of dataset-
related techniques that have stood the test of time, grouping them into
the following categories: collecting more data, data augmentation, and
pretraining.

Collecting More Data
One of the best ways to reduce overfitting is to collect more (good-
quality) data. We can plot learning curves to find out whether a given
model would benefit from more data. To construct a learning curve, we
train the model to different training set sizes (10 percent, 20 percent,
and so on) and evaluate the trained model on the same fixed-size
validation or test set. As shown in Figure 5-1, the validation accuracy
increases as the training set sizes increase. This indicates that we can
improve the model’s performance by collecting more data.




Figure 5-1: The learning curve plot of a model fit to different training set sizes
   The gap between training and validation performance indicates the
degree of overfitting—the more extensive the gap, the more overfitting
occurs. Conversely, the slope indicating an improvement in the
validation performance suggests the model is underfitting and can
benefit from more data. Typically, additional data can decrease both
underfitting and overfitting.

Data Augmentation
Data augmentation refers to generating new data records or features
based on existing data. It allows for the expansion of a dataset without
additional data collection.
   Data augmentation allows us to create different versions of the
original input data, which can improve the model’s generalization
performance. Why? Augmented data can help the model improve its
ability to generalize, since it makes it harder to memorize spurious
information via training examples or features—or, in the case of image
data, exact pixel values for specific pixel locations. Figure 5-2 highlights
common image data augmentation techniques, including increasing
brightness, flipping, and cropping.
Figure 5-2: A selection of different image data augmentation techniques
   Data augmentation is usually standard for image data (see Figure 5-
2) and text data (discussed further in Chapter 15), but data
augmentation methods for tabular data also exist.
   Instead of collecting more data or augmenting existing data, it is also
possible to generate new, synthetic data. While more common for
image data and text, generating synthetic data is also possible for tabular
datasets.

Pretraining
As discussed in Chapter 2, self-supervised learning lets us leverage large,
unlabeled datasets to pretrain neural networks. This can also help
reduce over-fitting on the smaller target datasets.
   As an alternative to self-supervised learning, traditional transfer
learning on large labeled datasets is also an option. Transfer learning is
most effective if the labeled dataset is closely related to the target
domain. For instance, if we train a model to classify bird species, we can
pretrain a network on a large, general animal classification dataset.
However, if such a large animal classification dataset is unavailable, we
can also pretrain the model on the relatively broad ImageNet dataset.
   A dataset may be extremely small and unsuitable for supervised
learning—for example, if it contains only a handful of labeled examples
per class. If our classifier needs to operate in a context where the
collection of additional labeled data is not feasible, we may also consider
few-shot learning.


Other Methods
The previous sections covered the main approaches to using and
modifying datasets to reduce overfitting. However, this is not an
exhaustive list. Other common techniques include:

    Feature engineering and normalization
    The inclusion of adversarial examples and label or feature noise
    Label smoothing
    Smaller batch sizes
    Data augmentation techniques such as Mixup, Cutout, and CutMix

   The next chapter covers additional techniques to reduce overfitting
from a model perspective, and it concludes by discussing which
regularization techniques we should consider in practice.


Exercises
5-1. Suppose we train an XGBoost model to classify images based on
     manually extracted features obtained from collaborators. The
     dataset of labeled training examples is relatively small, but
     fortunately, our collaborators also have a labeled training set from
     an older project on a related domain. We’re considering
     implementing a transfer learning approach to train the XGBoost
     model. Is this a feasible option? If so, how could we do it? (Assume
     we are allowed to use only XGBoost and not another classification
     algorithm or model.)
5-2. Suppose we’re working on the image classification problem of
     implementing MNIST-based handwritten digit recognition. We’ve
     added a decent amount of data augmentation to try to reduce
     overfitting. Unfortunately, we find that the classification accuracy is
     much worse than it was before the augmentation. What are some
     potential reasons for this?


References
    A paper on data augmentation for tabular data: Derek Snow,
    “DeltaPy: A Framework for Tabular Data Augmentation in
    Python” (2020), https://github.com/firmai/deltapy.
    The paper proposing the GReaT method for generating synthetic
    tabular data using an auto-regressive generative large language
    model: Vadim Borisov et al., “Language Models Are Realistic
    Tabular Data Generators” (2022), https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.06280.
    The paper proposing the TabDDPM method for generating
    synthetic tabular data using a diffusion model: Akim Kotelnikov et
    al., “TabDDPM: Modelling Tabular Data with Diffusion Models”
    (2022), https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.15421.
    Scikit-learn’s user guide offers a section on preprocessing data,
    featuring techniques like feature scaling and normalization that can
    enhance your model’s performance: https://scikit-
    learn.org/stable/modules/preprocessing.xhtml.
A survey on methods for robustly training deep models with noisy
labels that explores techniques to mitigate the impact of incorrect
or misleading target values: Bo Han et al., “A Survey of Label-noise
Representation Learning: Past, Present and Future” (2020),
https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.04406.
Theoretical and empirical evidence to support the idea that
controlling the ratio of batch size to learning rate in stochastic
gradient descent is crucial for good modeling performance in deep
neural networks: Fengxiang He, Tongliang Liu, and Dacheng Tao,
“Control Batch Size and Learning Rate to Generalize Well:
Theoretical and Empirical Evidence” (2019),
https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.5555/3454287.3454390.
Inclusion of adversarial examples, which are input samples designed
to mislead the model, can improve prediction performance by
making the model more robust: Cihang Xie et al., “Adversarial
Examples Improve Image Recognition” (2019),
https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.09665.
Label smoothing is a regularization technique that mitigates the
impact of potentially incorrect labels in the dataset by replacing
hard 0 and 1 classification targets with softened values: Rafael
Müller, Simon Kornblith, and Geoffrey Hinton, “When Does
Label Smoothing Help?” (2019), https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.02629.
Mixup, a popular method that trains neural networks on blended
data pairs to improve generalization and robustness: Hongyi Zhang
et al., “Mixup: Beyond Empirical Risk Minimization” (2018),
https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.09412.
                                  6
          REDUCING OVERFITTING WITH MODEL
                   MODIFICATIONS




Suppose we train a neural network classifier in a supervised fashion and
already employ various dataset-related techniques to mitigate
overfitting. How can we change the model or make modifications to the
training loop to further reduce the effect of overfitting?
   The most successful approaches against overfitting include
regularization techniques like dropout and weight decay. As a rule of
thumb, models with a larger number of parameters require more
training data to generalize well. Hence, decreasing the model size and
capacity can sometimes also help reduce overfitting. Lastly, building
ensemble models is among the most effective ways to combat
overfitting, but it comes with increased computational expense.
   This chapter outlines the key ideas and techniques for several
categories of reducing overfitting with model modifications and then
compares them to one another. It concludes by discussing how to
choose between all types of overfitting reduction methods, including
those discussed in the previous chapter.
Common Methods
The various model- and training-related techniques to reduce
overfitting can be grouped into three broad categories: (1) adding
regularization, (2) choosing smaller models, and (3) building ensemble
models.

Regularization
We can interpret regularization as a penalty against complexity. Classic
regularization techniques for neural networks include L2 regularization
and the related weight decay method. We implement L2 regularization
by adding a penalty term to the loss function that is minimized during
training. This added term represents the size of the weights, such as the
squared sum of the weights. The following formula shows an L2
regularized loss




where λ is a hyperparameter that controls the regularization strength.
   During backpropagation, the optimizer minimizes the modified loss,
now including the additional penalty term, which leads to smaller model
weights and can improve generalization to unseen data.
   Weight decay is similar to L2 regularization but is applied to the
optimizer directly rather than modifying the loss function. Since weight
decay has the same effect as L2 regularization, the two methods are
often used synonymously, but there may be subtle differences
depending on the implementation details and optimizer.
   Many other techniques have regularizing effects. For brevity’s sake,
we’ll discuss just two more widely used methods: dropout and early
stopping.
   Dropout reduces overfitting by randomly setting some of the
activations of the hidden units to zero during training. Consequently,
the neural network cannot rely on particular neurons to be activated.
Instead, it learns to use a larger number of neurons and multiple
independent representations of the same data, which helps to reduce
overfitting.
   In early stopping, we monitor the model’s performance on a
validation set during training and stop the training process when the
performance on the validation set begins to decline, as illustrated in
Figure 6-1.




Figure 6-1: Early stopping
   In Figure 6-1, we can see that the validation accuracy increases as the
training and validation accuracy gap closes. The point where the
training and validation accuracy is closest is the point with the least
amount of over-fitting, which is usually a good point for early stopping.

Smaller Models
Classic bias-variance theory suggests that reducing model size can
reduce overfitting. The intuition behind this theory is that, as a general
rule of thumb, the smaller the number of model parameters, the smaller
its capacity to memorize or overfit to noise in the data. The following
paragraphs discuss methods to reduce the model size, including
pruning, which removes parameters from a model, and knowledge
distillation, which transfers knowledge to a smaller model.
    Besides reducing the number of layers and shrinking the layers’
widths as a hyperparameter tuning procedure, another approach to
obtaining smaller models is iterative pruning, in which we train a large
model to achieve good performance on the original dataset. We then
iteratively remove parameters of the model, retraining it on the dataset
such that it maintains the same predictive performance as the original
model. (The lottery ticket hypothesis, discussed in Chapter 4, uses
iterative pruning.)
    Another common approach to obtaining smaller models is knowledge
distillation. The general idea behind this approach is to transfer
knowledge from a large, more complex model (the teacher) to a smaller
model (the student). Ideally, the student achieves the same predictive
accuracy as the teacher, but it does so more efficiently due to the smaller
size. As a nice side effect, the smaller student may overfit less than the
larger teacher model.
    Figure 6-2 diagrams the original knowledge distillation process.
Here, the teacher is first trained in a regular supervised fashion to
classify the examples in the dataset well, using a conventional cross-
entropy loss between the predicted scores and ground truth class labels.
While the smaller student network is trained on the same dataset, the
training objective is to minimize both (a) the cross entropy between the
outputs and the class labels and (b) the difference between its outputs
and the teacher outputs (measured using Kullback–Leibler divergence,
which quantifies the difference between two probability distributions by
calculating how much one distribution diverges from the other in terms
of information content).
Figure 6-2: The original knowledge distillation process
   By minimizing the Kullback–Leibler divergence—the difference
between the teacher and student score distributions—the student learns
to mimic the teacher while being smaller and more efficient.

Caveats with Smaller Models
While pruning and knowledge distillation can also enhance a model’s
generalization performance, these techniques are not primary or
effective ways of reducing overfitting.
   Early research results indicate that pruning and knowledge
distillation can improve the generalization performance, presumably
due to smaller model sizes. However, counterintuitively, recent research
studying phenomena like double descent and grokking also showed that
larger, overparameterized models have improved generalization
performance if they are trained beyond the point of overfitting. Double
descent refers to the phenomenon in which models with either a small or
an extremely large number of parameters have good generalization
performance, while models with a number of parameters equal to the
number of training data points have poor generalization performance.
Grokking reveals that as the size of a dataset decreases, the need for
optimization increases, and generalization performance can improve
well past the point of overfitting.
    How can we reconcile the observation that pruned models can
exhibit better generalization performance with contradictory
observations from studies of double descent and grokking? Researchers
recently showed that the improved training process partly explains the
reduction of overfitting due to pruning. Pruning involves more
extended training periods and a replay of learning rate schedules that
may be partly responsible for the improved generalization performance.
    Pruning and knowledge distillation remain excellent ways to improve
the computational efficiency of a model. However, while they can also
enhance a model’s generalization performance, these techniques are not
primary or effective ways of reducing overfitting.

Ensemble Methods
Ensemble methods combine predictions from multiple models to
improve the overall prediction performance. However, the downside of
using multiple models is an increased computational cost.
    We can think of ensemble methods as asking a committee of experts
to weigh in on a decision and then combining their judgments in some
way to make a final decision. Members in a committee often have
different backgrounds and experiences. While they tend to agree on
basic decisions, they can overrule bad decisions by majority rule. This
doesn’t mean that the majority of experts is always right, but there is a
good chance that the majority of the committee is more often right, on
average, than every single member.
   The most basic example of an ensemble method is majority voting.
Here, we train k different classifiers and collect the predicted class label
from each of these k models for a given input. We then return the most
frequent class label as the final prediction. (Ties are usually resolved
using a confidence score, randomly picking a label, or picking the class
label with the lowest index.)
   Ensemble methods are more prevalent in classical machine learning
than deep learning because it is more computationally expensive to
employ multiple models than to rely on a single one. In other words,
deep neural networks require significant computational resources,
making them less suitable for ensemble methods.
   Random forests and gradient boosting are popular examples of
ensemble methods. However, by using majority voting or stacking, for
example, we can combine any group of models: an ensemble may
consist of a support vector machine, a multilayer perceptron, and a
nearest-neighbor classifier. Here, stacking (also known as stacked
generalization) is a more advanced variant of majority voting that
involves training a new model to combine the predictions of several
other models rather than obtaining the label by majority vote.
   A popular industry technique is to build models from k-fold cross-
validation, a model evaluation technique in which we train and evaluate
a model on k training folds. We then compute the average performance
metric across all k iterations to estimate the overall performance
measure of the model. After evaluation, we can either train the model
on the entire training dataset or combine the individual models as an
ensemble, as shown in Figure 6-3.
Figure 6-3: k-fold cross-validation for creating model ensembles
   As shown in Figure 6-3, the k-fold ensemble approach trains each of
the k models on the respective k – 1 training folds in each round. After
evaluating the models on the validation folds, we can combine them
into a majority vote classifier or build an ensemble using stacking, a
technique that combines multiple classification or regression models via
a meta-model.
   While the ensemble approach can potentially reduce overfitting and
improve robustness, this approach is not always suitable. For instance,
potential downsides include managing and deploying an ensemble of
models, which can be more complex and computationally expensive
than using a single model.
Other Methods
So far, this book has covered some of the most prominent techniques to
reduce overfitting. Chapter 5 covered techniques that aim to reduce
over-fitting from a data perspective. Additional techniques for reducing
overfitting with model modifications include skip-connections (found in
residual networks, for example), look-ahead optimizers, stochastic
weight averaging, multitask learning, and snapshot ensembles.
   While they are not originally designed to reduce overfitting, layer
input normalization techniques such as batch normalization
(BatchNorm) and layer normalization (LayerNorm) can stabilize
training and often have a regularizing effect that reduces overfitting.
Weight normalization, which normalizes the model weights instead of
layer inputs, could also lead to better generalization performance.
However, this effect is less direct since weight normalization
(WeightNorm) doesn’t explicitly act as a regularizer like weight decay
does.


Choosing a Regularization Technique
Improving data quality is an essential first step in reducing overfitting.
However, for recent deep neural networks with large numbers of
parameters, we need to do more to achieve an acceptable level of
overfitting. Therefore, data augmentation and pretraining, along with
established techniques such as dropout and weight decay, remain crucial
overfitting reduction methods.
   In practice, we can and should use multiple methods at once to
reduce overfitting for an additive effect. To achieve the best results,
treat selecting these techniques as a hyperparameter optimization
problem.


Exercises
6-1. Suppose we’re using early stopping as a mechanism to reduce over-
     fitting—in particular, a modern early-stopping variant that creates
     checkpoints of the best model (for instance, the model with the
     highest validation accuracy) during training so that we can load it
     after the training has completed. This mechanism can be enabled
     in most modern deep learning frameworks. However, a colleague
     recommends tuning the number of training epochs instead. What
     are some of the advantages and disadvantages of each approach?
6-2. Ensemble models have been established as a reliable and successful
     method for decreasing overfitting and enhancing the reliability of
     predictive modeling efforts. However, there’s always a trade-off.
     What are some of the drawbacks associated with ensemble
     techniques?


References
    For more on the distinction between L2 regularization and weight
    decay: Guodong Zhang et al., “Three Mechanisms of Weight
    Decay Regularization” (2018), https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.12281.
    Research results indicate that pruning and knowledge distillation
    can improve generalization performance, presumably due to
    smaller model sizes: Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff
    Dean, “Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural Network” (2015),
    https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02531.
    Classic bias-variance theory suggests that reducing model size can
    reduce overfitting: Jerome H. Friedman, Robert Tibshirani, and
    Trevor Hastie, “Model Selection and Bias-Variance Tradeoff,”
    Chapter 2.9, in The Elements of Statistical Learning (Springer, 2009).
    The lottery ticket hypothesis applies knowledge distillation to find
    smaller networks with the same predictive performance as the
    original one: Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin, “The Lottery
    Ticket Hypothesis: Finding Sparse, Trainable Neural Networks”
    (2018), https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.03635.
For more on double descent:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Double_descent.
The phenomenon of grokking indicates that generalization
performance can improve well past the point of overfitting: Alethea
Power et al., “Grokking: Generalization Beyond Overfitting on
Small Algorithmic Datasets” (2022),
https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.02177.
Recent research shows that the improved training process partly
explains the reduction of overfitting due to pruning: Tian Jin et al.,
“Pruning’s Effect on Generalization Through the Lens of Training
and Regularization” (2022), https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.13738.
Dropout was previously discussed as a regularization technique, but
it can also be considered an ensemble method that approximates a
weighted geometric mean of multiple networks: Pierre Baldi and
Peter J. Sadowski, “Understanding Dropout” (2013),
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2013/hash/71f6278d140af599e06a
d9bf1ba03cb0-Abstract.xhtml.
Regularization cocktails need to be tuned on a per-dataset basis:
Arlind Kadra et al., “Well-Tuned Simple Nets Excel on Tabular
Datasets” (2021), https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.11189.
                                     7
             MULTI-GPU TRAINING PARADIGMS




What are the different multi-GPU training paradigms, and what are
their respective advantages and disadvantages?
   Multi-GPU training paradigms can be categorized into two groups:
dividing data for parallel processing with multiple GPUs and dividing
the model among multiple GPUs to handle memory constraints when
the model size surpasses that of a single GPU. Data parallelism falls into
the first category, while model parallelism and tensor parallelism fall
into the second category. Techniques like pipeline parallelism borrow
ideas from both categories. In addition, current software
implementations such as DeepSpeed, Colossal AI, and others blend
multiple approaches into a hybrid technique.
   This chapter introduces several training paradigms and provides
advice on which to use in practice.

 NOTE
 This chapter primarily uses the term GPUs to describe the hardware
 utilized for parallel processing. However, the same concepts and techniques
 discussed can be applied to other specialized hardware devices, such as tensor
 processing units (TPUs) or other accelerators, depending on the specific
 architecture and requirements of the system.


The Training Paradigms
The following sections discuss the model parallelism, data parallelism,
tensor parallelism, and sequence parallelism multi-GPU training
paradigms.

Model Parallelism
Model parallelism, or inter-op parallelism, is a technique in which different
sections of a large model are placed on different GPUs and are
computed sequentially, with intermediate results passed between the
devices. This allows for the training and execution of models that might
not fit entirely on a single device, but it can require intricate
coordination to manage the dependencies between different parts of the
model.
   Model parallelism is perhaps the most intuitive form of
parallelization across devices. For example, for a simple neural network
that consists of only two layers—a hidden layer and an output layer—we
can keep one layer on one GPU and the other layer on another GPU.
Of course, this can scale to an arbitrary number of layers and GPUs.
   This is a good strategy for dealing with limited GPU memory where
the complete network does not fit into one GPU. However, there are
more efficient ways of using multiple GPUs, such as tensor parallelism,
because the chain-like structure (layer 1 on GPU 1 → layer 2 on GPU 2
→ . . .) in model parallelism introduces a bottleneck. In other words, a
major disadvantage of model parallelism is that the GPUs have to wait
for each other. They cannot efficiently work in parallel, as they depend
on one other’s outputs.

Data Parallelism
Data parallelism has been the default mode for multi-GPU training for
several years. Here, we divide a minibatch into smaller microbatches.
Each GPU then processes a microbatch separately to compute the loss
and loss gradients for the model weights. After the individual devices
process the microbatches, the gradients are combined to compute the
weight update for the next round.
   An advantage of data parallelism over model parallelism is that the
GPUs can run in parallel. Each GPU processes a portion of the training
minibatch, that is, a microbatch. However, a caveat is that each GPU
requires a full copy of the model. This is obviously not feasible if we
have large models that don’t fit into the GPU’s VRAM.

Tensor Parallelism
Tensor parallelism, or intra-op parallelism, is a more efficient form of
model parallelism. Here, the weight and activation matrices are spread
across the devices instead of distributing whole layers across devices: the
individual matrices are split, so we split an individual matrix
multiplication across GPUs.
   We can implement tensor parallelism using basic principles of linear
algebra; we can split a matrix multiplication across two GPUs in a row-
or column-wise fashion, as illustrated in Figure 7-1 for two GPUs.
(This concept can be extended to an arbitrary number of GPUs.)
Figure 7-1: Tensor parallelism for distributing matrix multiplication across different devices
   Like model parallelism, tensor parallelism allows us to work around
memory limitations. At the same time, it also lets us execute operations
in parallel, similar to data parallelism.
   A small weakness of tensor parallelism is that it can result in high
communication overhead between the multiple GPUs across which the
matrices are split or sharded. For instance, tensor parallelism requires
frequent synchronization of the model parameters across devices, which
can slow down the overall training process.
   Figure 7-2 compares model, data, and tensor parallelism.
Figure 7-2: A comparison of model, data, and tensor parallelism
   In model parallelism, we put different layers onto different GPUs to
work around GPU memory limitations. In data parallelism, we split a
batch across GPUs to train copies of the model in parallel, averaging
gradients for the weight update afterward. In tensor parallelism, we split
matrices (inputs and weights) across different GPUs for parallel
processing when models are too large to fit into GPU memory.

Pipeline Parallelism
In pipeline parallelism, activations are passed during the forward pass, as
in model parallelism. The twist is that the gradients of the input tensor
are passed backward to prevent the devices from being idle. In a sense,
pipeline parallelism is a sophisticated hybrid version of data and model
parallelism.
    We can think of pipeline parallelism as a form of model parallelism
that tries to minimize the sequential computation bottleneck, enhancing
the parallelism between the individual layers sitting on different devices.
However, pipeline parallelism also borrows ideas from data parallelism,
such as splitting minibatches further into microbatches.
    Pipeline parallelism is definitely an improvement over model
parallelism, though it is not perfect and there will be idle bubbles. A
further disadvantage of pipeline parallelism is that it may require
significant effort to design and implement the pipeline stages and
associated communication patterns. Additionally, the performance gains
it generates may not be as substantial as those from other parallelization
techniques, such as pure data parallelism, especially for small models or
in cases where the communication overhead is high.
    For modern architectures that are too large to fit into GPU memory,
it is more common nowadays to use a blend of data parallelism and
tensor parallelism techniques instead of pipeline parallelism.

Sequence Parallelism
Sequence parallelism aims to address computational bottlenecks when
working with long sequences using transformer-based LLMs. More
specifically, one shortcoming of transformers is that the self-attention
mechanism (the original scaled-dot product attention) scales
quadratically with the input sequence length. There are, of course,
more efficient alternatives to the original attention mechanism that
scale linearly.
    However, these efficient self-attention mechanisms are less popular,
and most people still prefer the original scaled-dot product attention
mechanism as of this writing. Sequence parallelism, illustrated in Figure
7-3, splits the input sequence into smaller chunks to be distributed
across GPUs, which aims to reduce computation memory constraints of
self-attention mechanisms.
Figure 7-3: Sequence parallelism divides long inputs among GPUs.
    How does sequence parallelism relate to the multi-GPU techniques
discussed earlier? Sequence parallelism deals specifically with sequential
data, tensor parallelism deals with the model’s internal structure, and
data parallelism deals with how the training data is divided.
Theoretically, since each of these parallelism strategies addresses a
different aspect of the computational challenge, they can thus be
combined in various ways to optimize the training or inference process.
Sequence parallelism is not as well studied as other parallelization
techniques, however.
    While sequence parallelism appears useful in practice, it also
introduces additional communication overheads similar to the
aforementioned parallelism techniques. Like data parallelism, it requires
us to duplicate the model and make sure it fits into the device memory.
Another of its disadvantages (depending on the implementation) for
multi-GPU training of transformers is that breaking up the input
sequence into smaller subsequences can decrease the model’s accuracy
(mainly when the model is applied to longer sequences).


Recommendations
Practical recommendations depend on the context. If we train small
models that fit onto a single GPU, then data parallelism strategies may
be the most efficient. Performance gains from pipeline parallelism may
not be as significant as those from other parallelization techniques, such
as data parallelism, especially for small models or in cases where the
communication overhead is high.
   If models are too large to fit into the memory of a single GPU, we
need to explore model or tensor parallelism. Tensor parallelism is
naturally more efficient; the GPUs can work in parallel since there is no
sequential dependency as in model parallelism.
   Modern multi-GPU strategies also typically combine data
parallelism and tensor parallelism.


Exercises
7-1. Suppose we are implementing our own version of tensor
     parallelism, which works great when we train our model with a
     standard stochastic gradient descent optimizer. However, when we
     try the Adam optimizer by Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba, we
     encounter an out-of-memory device. What problem might explain
     this issue?
7-2. Suppose we don’t have access to a GPU and are considering using
     data parallelism on the CPU. Is this a good idea?


References
    The original paper on the Adam optimizer: Diederik P. Kingma
    and Jimmy Ba, “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization”
(2014), https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
For more on DeepSpeed and Colossal-AI for multi-GPU training:
https://github.com/microsoft/DeepSpeed and
https://github.com/hpcaitech/ColossalAI.
Pipeline parallelism tutorials and research by the DeepSpeed team:
https://www.deepspeed.ai/tutorials/pipeline and Yanping Huang et al.,
“GPipe: Efficient Training of Giant Neural Networks Using
Pipeline Parallelism” (2018), https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.06965.
The paper proposing sequence parallelism for transformer-based
language models: Shenggui Li et al., “Sequence Parallelism: Long
Sequence Training from [a] System[s] Perspective” (2022),
https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.13120.
The scaled-dot product attention mechanism was proposed with
the original transformer architecture: Ashish Vaswani et al.,
“Attention Is All You Need” (2017),
https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
A survey covering alternatives to the original self-attention
mechanism that scale linearly: Yi Tay et al., “Efficient
Transformers: A Survey” (2020), https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.06732.
A survey covering additional techniques to improve the training
efficiency of transformers: Bohan Zhuang et al., “A Survey on
Efficient Training of Transformers” (2023),
https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.01107.
Modern multi-GPU strategies typically combine data parallelism
and tensor parallelism. Popular examples include DeepSpeed stages
2 and 3, described in this tutorial on the zero redundancy
optimizer: https://www.deepspeed.ai/tutorials/zero/.
