                    Introduction




   Seeing more, seeing differently, seeing everything

Argus was a giant with a hundred eyes, older than the ancient
Greek gods but a servant to them. He could see in all directions
at once and he never stopped watching. Even when he slept,
only some of his eyes were closed.
   Human vision is far more limited. We have just two eyes in
the front of our heads and can’t see what is behind us at all.
We see what is straight ahead of us clearly, but our peripheral
vision is poor. Many other animals have eyes on the sides or
even on the backs of their heads. Some species can see infrared
or ultraviolet light. Humans cannot. We can see only in the
rather limited way that our eyes, our brains and our bodies
enable. And yet, for sighted humans, vision is the primary way
we make sense of the world around us.
   Humans have used technology to expand our limited vision
for millennia. We have imagined mythical creatures such as
Argus and created stories about future technologies such as
optical implants or holographic phones. The dream and the
promise of machine vision is that it will enhance our limited
human vision. We imagine that technologies will allow us to
2                        Introduction

see more, to see differently and even to see everything. But
each of these new ways of seeing carries with it its own blind
spots. The blind spots and distortions of machine vision may
be different from the blind spots and distortions of unaided
human vision, but machine vision technologies are limited by
their own material constraints. Machine vision changes what
humans can see. From telescopes and cinematic cameras to
facial recognition, smart surveillance and emotion recogni-
tion: how will these new extensions of human vision change
our perception of the world? What will we not see when seeing
with machine vision?
   This book analyses the relationships between humans and
machine vision technologies by exploring the historical devel-
opment of technologies that have helped us to see, ranging
from the first mirror, which was carved from black obsidian
8,000 years ago, through the telescopes that ignited the sci-
entific revolution, to contemporary networks of surveillance
cameras that send automated alerts about suspicious activities
to their owners or to law enforcement. Machine vision can
create great beauty and make wonderful things possible. New
visual technologies enable scientific advances and help to cure
diseases. Artists and filmmakers use animation, virtual reality
and images generated by deep learning to create breath-taking
imagined spaces and images.
   Machine vision also comes with many problems and limita-
tions. Algorithmic bias affects machine vision as it does other
technologies using machine learning and big datasets. Facial
recognition systems are often intrinsically biased; they are
better at identifying white men than black women. A neural
network trained on internet images with English captions will
re-create the bias in the training data, generating images and
propagating a version of a world where humans are almost
always white, nurses are women, doctors are men and terrorists
look Arabic.1
   Some visual technologies, such as microscopes or high-
                          Introduction                          3

speed cameras, allow us to see objects that are too small,
too distant, or too fast for the human eye to detect. Others
allow us to see wavelengths beyond visible light, such as night
vision goggles using infrared to perceive warm bodies in the
dark. We use radar and ultrasound and LIDAR to send out
signals that bounce off objects, and that allows us to gener-
ate three-dimensional models of objects we cannot otherwise
see: approaching aeroplanes in the dark or an unborn child
sucking its thumb in its mother’s womb. Satellites, drones
and networks of surveillance cameras create vast datasets of
images that can be processed by computers to find and identify
individuals or track changes in ways that were never before
possible. Cameras keep watch for us, fastened to doorbells,
street signs and buildings. These cameras are automated by
artificial intelligence models that recognise faces or car licence
plates, sending alerts to their owners or the police when they
identify something as suspicious.
   I define machine vision as the registration, analysis and rep-
resentation of visual information by machines and algorithms.
Machine vision technologies register visual information and
store it as data that can be processed computationally. My
definition is intentionally broad to allow us to analyse the
larger-scale shifts that are currently taking place in visual
representation. I chose the term ‘machine vision’ instead of
‘computer vision’ because I want to include the history of
seeing with technologies. New visual technologies have been
agents of cultural change well before computers. As I’ll discuss
in chapter 1, the fifteenth-century invention of linear per-
spective, coupled with the glass lenses needed for telescopes,
were central to the scientific revolution and the modern age.
Photography, cinema and other nineteenth- and twentieth-
century imaging technologies likewise came with societal
change and scientific advances. Machine vision has advanced
exponentially in the last decade due to AI: there has been
rapid progress in machine learning models trained on massive
4                          Introduction

datasets. Will these new technologies lead to new paradigms,
as happened with telescopes in the Renaissance and photogra-
phy in the nineteenth century? This book aims to contribute to
our understanding of what we are becoming.
    The idea of artificial intelligence (AI) is at least as old as
the ancient Greeks, as Adrienne Meyor demonstrates in her
book Gods and Robots, but it was in the 1950s that advances
in computer science made actual thinking machines begin
to seem feasible. Let me try to explain how the AI used to
generate images or recognise faces works. Two main strands
of AI have been developed from the 1950s.2 The first, symbolic
AI, is based on the idea that a form of common sense could
be explicitly coded as a set of rules or algorithms that would
allow a computer to think rationally. The second kind, sub-
symbolic AI, is based on machine learning from data. With
machine learning, a computer program is written to analyse
a dataset and infer its own rules from patterns it finds in the
data. Until the 1990s, symbolic AI seemed the most likely to
succeed. However, with the extreme expansion of available
training data due to internet content, along with increased
processing power, subsymbolic AI or machine learning took
off. This led to radical improvements first in machine vision
and soon after in large language models that can generate
news stories, summarise texts or act as a very convincing
conversation partner.3 Current AI is impressive, but it can
still only do specific tasks, such as classifying images, play-
ing a game of chess or generating text that looks similar to
something a human might write. Some people think that in
time this will lead to artificial general intelligence (AGI) – that
is, a computational system that, like humans, can do many
different tasks and that might even be sentient. I love reading
science fiction about sentient AI, but I think this is still firmly
fiction. In chapter 2 I’ll discuss how AI can be said to cognise
rather than think in a self-reflective way as humans do. The
way AI cognises is quite different from human cognition, and
                          Introduction                          5

that means that AI-driven machine vision is quite different
from human vision.
   Machine learning was first used in image recognition. In
1957, Frank Rosenblatt proposed ‘the perceptron’, a single-
layer neural network that could read handwritten numbers.4 In
this kind of machine learning, individual units (‘neurons’) are
trained on a set of images labelled by humans. For instance, an
image of a cat is labelled ‘cat’ and an image of a dog is labelled
‘dog’. The units are given random numeric values to start with
and the program adjusts their values based on the input. The
input from all values is then combined and checked against
the label. Imagine that the correct value for ‘cat’ is 1 and ‘not
cat’ is 0, and the first round of training produces the score 0.6.
The model is now given the information that the image is a
cat and the value should be 1. Then it goes through the data
again, changing its processes more or less at random. If the
score after the second round is closer to 1, the model learns
that, whatever its new strategies were, they were better. It
tries again, becoming less random with each round as it learns
which strategies are successful and which are not. After many
such rounds, the model will be trained and able to identify the
image of a cat that it was trained on. But it may not be able to
identify a photo of a new cat.
   In the 1970s, deep learning was proposed, where there are
several layers of ‘neurons’, each layer feeding its results to the
next. Deep learning produced better results than Rosenblatt’s
single-layer neural network but was not as successful as sym-
bolic AI and was not developed much further until the 1990s.5
A major shift occurred in 2010, when researchers gained
access to big data generated on the internet and to far higher
computing power. Deep learning (also often called ‘neural net-
works’) made rapid advances, driven first by image recognition
trained on ImageNet, a database of images scraped from the
internet that was semantically organised using WordNet. Kate
Crawford and Trevor Paglen’s artwork ImageNet Roulette and
6                        Introduction

their accompanying essay explain how this works and demon-
strate how problematic the results can be. WordNet includes
categories that cannot be unambiguously expressed in images
(such as ‘sex worker’) as well as slurs and other problematic
terms, so when used to classify images, and especially images
of people, you run into problems.6 Rapid advances were also
occurring in large language models (LLMs), which are trained
on vast amounts of writing from the web and from books.
By 2017, both text generation and image recognition gave
impressive results.7 Self-supervised learning also came to the
fore, meaning that datasets no longer have to be annotated
by humans before being used as training data for a machine
learning model.
   In 2021, a group of Stanford researchers coined the term
‘foundation model’ to describe models that use deep learn-
ing at such scale that they gain new capabilities, in particular
homogenisation and emergence.8 They have a homogenising
effect because one model is used for many tasks, which can
give more stability but also means any defect or bias will be
inherited by all downstream applications. Emergence is
another key feature: these models have unanticipated effects.
For instance, the developers did not expect that large language
models would be able to generate text. Foundation models are
so expensive to train that, as of 2022, only big tech companies
can afford to train them, but they are then fine-tuned and put
to many other downstream uses.
   As I finish writing this book, image generation models such
as DALL-E, Midjourney and Stable Diffusion are capable of
generating photorealistic images from written prompts, and
large language models such as GTP-4 can have convincing
conversations and answer general knowledge questions,
though still with some factual errors. These models depend
upon the deep-learning structure I described above, but they
are trained on even more data and with even more parameters.
In my simple example above, where ‘cat’ is 1 and ‘not cat’ is 0,
                            Introduction                           7

there is just one parameter – cat or not cat. Current models
can be trained on more than a billion parameters. To an AI
model, that cat is understood as a vector – that is, a list of
numeric values, one for each parameter. Perhaps the vector
for cat is [0.642, 0.231, 0.932, . . .], and so on. Once trained, the
model no longer has access to the original photos. Instead it
operates with what is called a vector space or semantic space, or
sometimes just space, where all the vectors are organised in a
multidimensional grid. Remember those coordinate grids you
draw in seventh grade, where you plot a point on an x–y grid?
To find the point [1,4] you draw a line from 1 on the x-axis and
4 on the y-axis and see where the lines meet. The vector space
or semantic space of a machine learning model is like that, but
each parameter is an axis. There isn’t just an x-axis and a y-axis,
but a z-axis and a billion more dimensions. I doubt you can
imagine that visually, but powerful computers can compute it.9
Latent space is another term that is used in machine learning
research: this is a lower-dimension version of the vector space
that can be sufficient to generate new data that is similar to
the training data. The important thing to remember is that a
trained deep-learning model does not directly access the train-
ing data; it accesses only this multidimensional set of vectors
describing different features of the dataset, such as words or
concepts or characteristics of images.
   Image generation models such as DALL-E are trained on
images with captions from the web.10 Users can write a prompt
describing an image, and the model will generate images
based on the concepts it has learned from the dataset. These
concepts can be surprisingly complex. For example, OpenAI’s
CLIP model has a specific neuron (or unit) that has learned
to respond to the concept ‘spider’ and can use it to group
drawings of spiders, the written word ‘spider’ and pictures of
Spiderman. Reading the paper announcing these ‘multimodal
neurons’, you can sense the wonder of the researchers, who
describe such a model almost as though it is a child: ‘Some
8                        Introduction

neurons seem like topics out of a kindergarten curriculum:
weather, seasons, letters, counting, or primary colors. All of
these features, even the trivial-seeming ones, have rich multi-
modality, such as a yellow neuron firing for images of the words
“yellow”, “banana” and “lemon”, in addition to the color.’11 The
paper, which is rich with interactive visualisations, goes on to
show how emotions such as ‘happy’ or ‘sleepy’ can be identified
across facial expressions or body language, and how concepts
can also connect to their opposites.
   If you would like a deeper understanding of the technical
aspects of AI that contemporary machine vision builds upon, I
recommend Melanie Mitchell’s book Artificial Intelligence and
Kate Crawford’s Atlas of AI.12 Both of these books give solid
but accessible explanations for a general audience. The first
few pages of the Stanford report on foundation models also
provide a brief but relatively accessible technical explanation.
Mark Andrejevic and Neil Selwyn’s book Facial Recognition
details the historical development of facial recognition in
particular and explains how this specific technology works in
more detail than I can here. OpenAI, Meta and Google also
provide accessible explanations to many of their models on
their websites. These often include interactive visuals, as well
as links to the research papers describing each model.
   The focus of this book is how different kinds of machine
vision allow humans to see in new ways. Without technology,
human vision is situated in two eyes and a brain that processes
their visual input. With access to home surveillance cameras
and DALL-E and satellite images of my neighbourhood, I can
see a lot more than just what is straight in front of me.


                   How vision is situated

The chapters of this book will explore ways in which machine
vision expands or escapes the situatedness of human vision:
                            Introduction                           9

by seeing more, by seeing differently, by seeing everything, by
being seen and, finally, by exploring what machine vision does
not see.
   Vision is always situated. I use ‘situated’ in a sense established
by Donna Haraway in her influential article ‘Situated knowl-
edges’, which was published in 1988. Haraway argues that the
closest we can get to objective knowledge is to acknowledge
that we always have only a partial perspective. Visual tech-
nologies, from satellite surveillance to medical imaging, seem
to promise the impossible: ‘the god trick of seeing everything
from nowhere’, as Haraway writes.13 In contrast to this ‘god
trick’, Haraway argues that knowledge is embodied. Therefore
‘objectivity turns out to be about particular and specific
embodiment.’14 When I write that vision is situated, I mean
that we always see from our own situation in the world, from a
particular standpoint and within the limitations of the physical
constraints of our bodies. When I look out of my window, I see
a view of my neighbourhood that is slightly different from what
a neighbour would see from their window, and quite different
from what a satellite image of the neighbourhood would cap-
ture. What I see is also situated by how sharp my vision is, by
my personal experiences (do I know who lives in each building
or what it means that my neighbour hasn’t put the trash out as
they usually do), by the time and season (is it dark or light), and
many other things.
   Machine vision technologies often present dazzling over-
views that appear to escape this situatedness: satellite images
showing the globe in amazing detail, images of distant galaxies
or of the microscopic worlds inside the cells of our bodies.
These kinds of image appear to be able to show the world as
though we are outside of it. They appear to be objective and to
show the world as it really is. Haraway argues, and I agree with
her, that this objective outside view is impossible.
   Saying that vision is situated also means that seeing is
embodied. What we can see is shaped by the constraints of our
10                       Introduction

bodies or by the constraints of the technologies we see with.
We see with two eyes, not a hundred, and, unlike many species,
we have poor peripheral vision. I’ll return to how different
species and different technologies see differently in chapter 2.
    When we use machine vision we are no longer entirely
bound to our human point of view or to the limitations and
affordances of our eyes and our brains. We can see the Earth
from outer space, or the blood vessels inside our bodies; we
can see the heat of bodies 30 kilometres away15 or capture the
motion of a galloping horse in a high-speed photograph, where
we would otherwise see nothing but a blur. Machine vision
can make distant events feel very close, as when we see live
videos of war atrocities, a carjacking captured by a neighbour’s
doorbell camera, or TikTok videos recorded in a teenager’s
bedroom. New visual technologies such as searchable satel-
lite images and electron microscopes and VR glasses are all
situated and thus limited ways of seeing, but we easily forget
this. It is easy to be swept away by the promotional material
and the gorgeous visuals. Perhaps we are also a little seduced
by Haraway’s ‘god trick’, or what José van Dijck calls dataism:
‘the ideology of dataism shows characteristics of a widespread
belief in the objective quantification and potential tracking
of all kinds of human behavior and sociality through online
media technologies.’16 This trust in technology as an almost
divine power will be a recurring theme in this book.
    Machine vision is non-human in that it allows us humans to
see things that would otherwise be invisible to us. At the same
time machine vision is completely human: humans imagine it,
humans design it and humans use it. Machines do not see with-
out us, or, perhaps more precisely, they would not see without
us. Machines depend on humans as much as humans depend
on machines. Machine vision doesn’t ‘see’ alone. Rather, its
sensory apparatus – its hardware and the algorithms it uses
to process data – is always part of an assemblage that humans
also participate in.
                           Introduction                         11

   I understand machine vision technologies not as technologi-
cal monoliths that inevitably determine human behaviour but
as participants in assemblages where humans, technologies and
cultural contexts act together. By focusing on the assemblage
more than on the technology itself, I build upon posthumanist
and feminist theories that emphasise relationships between
humans and non-human agents such as technologies, insti-
tutions and our natural environment. The prefix post in
posthumanism indicates that it comes after the humanism that
began in the Enlightenment era, when the human was seen
as the centre of the universe, the subject who could rule and
control all other creatures and entities. For this master human
subject, technology, the environment and even other groups of
humans were seen primarily as objects or tools. Posthumanism
emphasises relationships and mutual interconnection instead
of the binary opposition between an active subject and a pas-
sive object. The concept of the assemblage helps us see how
different agents come together in different constellations in
different contexts.
   We don’t fully control the technologies we use, and the
technologies don’t fully control us. By being aware of the
assemblages we choose to enter into (or that are thrust upon
us) we can start to untangle how technologies work in specific
contexts. Then we can try to design assemblages that help build
the kinds of communities and societies we want to live in. To
understand technology, then, we also need to understand the
assemblages it participates in. I’ll go into more detail in chapter
2 about what it means to use the concept of assemblages to
think about technology.
   The assemblages don’t consist only of humans and machines;
cultural and regulatory contexts are also important. This book
was written partly in Norway, my usual home, and partly in
the USA, my temporary home for the first half of 2022. The
contrasts between the two countries seemed stronger this time
than on my previous visits, with anxiety ratcheted sky high
12                         Introduction

in the USA due to the pandemic, to rising crime rates and to
political tensions. The more I learned about how technologies
are discussed and used in the Chicago suburb where I was
living, the more I realised how differently these technologies
were being adopted and understood there compared to my
own home environment in Norway.
   Technology does not have the same effects in all contexts. The
mere existence of surveillance technologies such as automated
licence plate readers or facial recognition does not necessarily
mean all the world will use them or that they will be used in
the same way in every context. Even within one country dif-
ferent technologies can be regulated or viewed very differently.
In the USA, it is far easier to install facial recognition cameras
in a school than to ban guns. Local US police departments can
combine data from licence plate readers with hundreds of other
public and data sources with little regulation, but there are no
central gun registries. That information is protected by strong
political lobbies.17 This means that it is far easier to implement
smart surveillance systems across the USA than it would be to
change gun control laws. In Norway, the private smart surveil-
lance systems that have spread across the USA are for the most
part illegal because of strong privacy legislation. These political
and institutional structures are also important participants in
the assemblages machine vision enters into.


         Situations and stories as analytical tools

One method I use to analyse the relationship between humans
and machine vision technologies is exploring specific exam-
ples of situations where humans and technologies act together.
Some of these machine vision situations are fictional or imag-
ined and some are real.
   The term ‘machine vision situation’ comes from my work
with a stellar group of researchers on a digital humanities
                         Introduction                       13

project to create a database documenting how machine vision
technologies are represented in digital art, video games and
narratives such as movies and novels.18 We wanted to explore
how humans and machine vision technologies interact in
assemblages where agency is distributed rather than framing
the human as using technology as a tool. Working as a team,
Ragnhild Solberg, Marianne Gunderson, Linda Kronman and
I developed a model for analysing situations in the artworks,
games and narratives that involved machine vision technolo-
gies. We identified agents in each situation and described
actions they took in a structured way, so we could use data
analysis and data visualisations to see overall patterns across
the 500 novels, movies, video games and artworks we analysed.
We discussed and wrote about our interpretations of how
machine vision was used and represented in individual works,
too, and discussed real-world examples with input from our
collaborator Gabriele de Seta.19
    Spending so much time reading, playing, watching and ana-
lysing art, games and narratives about machine vision gave us
a very broad overview of how machine vision technologies are
portrayed in fiction and art. In this book I draw upon many
examples from these works, especially from science fiction
literature and film. Throughout you will find short readings
of artworks, movies, games and novels where machine vision
technologies are central. I interlace the more theoretical dis-
cussions with these analyses of fiction because fiction allows
for another mode of understanding new technology that
enables a more emotional and often more visceral, embodied
kind of insight. You have probably noticed the surge in the
popularity of science fiction in recent years. The most popular
science fiction today deals with the near future. Series such
as Black Mirror exaggerate contemporary issues just a little
bit to make the ethical dilemmas even more acute: what hap-
pens when everyone has an implant that records everything
they see or hear, as in ‘The entire history of you’, or when a
14                        Introduction

mother implants her child with the Arkangel system, allowing
the mother both to see everything the child sees and to alter
the child’s sight so that ‘inappropriate content’, such as blood,
is filtered out and not seen by the child.20
    Artists are also exploring machine vision, both as spectacle
and in more critical ways. Refik Anadol’s gorgeous, crowd-
pleasing Machine Hallucination installations use neural
networks trained on thousands of images of cities to generate
videos showing new, dream-like skyscrapers rising and falling,
like the cities we know but strange. Other artists use machine
vision technologies for critique and exploration of new
situations that may become common. For instance, Lauren
McCarthy and Kyle McDonald’s artwork US+ is a plug-in to be
used during video chats that analyses users’ facial expressions
and gives live advice about how to improve their interper-
sonal relationship. Video games are another popular medium
where explorations of machine vision are common, whether
as a playful aspect of the interface, as in the augmented real-
ity of Pokémon GO, or as a substantial element in the story.
The Watch Dog games let players view and control the game
world through surveillance systems,21 while an indie game
such as Samantha Gorman’s Tendar lets players adopt a virtual
guppie that must be fed with emotions that it harvests from the
player’s smile using emotion recognition algorithms.22
    Watching movies, playing games, reading novels and expe-
riencing artworks are important ways in which people think
through possible situations that may occur with new technolo-
gies such as machine vision. The imaginary worlds of stories,
games and art allow us to explore an emotional engagement
with new technologies and the possible societal and ethical
changes that may come with them. This emotional engagement
tends to be lacking from computer science textbooks or pat-
ents for new smart home technologies. Through empathy with
characters in fictional situations, we imagine how we ourselves
would react and what choices we would make. By interacting
                          Introduction                        15

with games and digital artworks, we can make choices without
the consequences of real life. The affective relationship we have
with art, stories and games lets us explore a sensory knowledge
and develop our sense of what technologies might lead to and
what technologies would be good for us – or not so good.
   To understand how machine vision is affecting the way
we humans see and relate to the world around us, we need
to understand the relationships between humans and tech-
nologies. A few years ago, I proposed situated data analysis as
a method for understanding how data is used and presented
on various platforms. Situated data analysis explores how the
same data is framed – or situated – in different ways for dif-
ferent audiences and purposes.23 It is about following the data,
and machine vision converts the visual to data. A situated data
analysis could be a useful method for examining how data from
automated licence plate readers, for instance, is presented
to police and processed in different situations, ranging from
alerts received by officers, to dashboards the police depart-
ment can use to analyse traffic flow, to the predictive policing
algorithms that the data can feed into. In this book, however,
I am interested less in the data itself and more in how we
humans are affected by machines and in the technologies that
sense and process the data. Focusing on stories, situations,
assemblages and emotions allows me to bring that affect and
those relationships into my analysis.


        Representational and operational images

Human sight is the ability to perceive and interpret electro-
magnetic radiation, or light, in the visible spectrum. Our eyes
and brains sense and process the light in our surroundings to
create an image of the world that we use to orient ourselves.
Machine vision technologies can also sense light, but they do
not need to convert it into an image. They process light as data.
16                          Introduction

Humans interpret different wavelengths of light as having
different colours. Having input from two separate eyes, our
brains interpret our stereoscopic vision as information about
depth and distance. A self-driving car senses a lot of the same
data about the environment as we do, in addition to other data
such as GPS locations from satellites and data from the car and
its engine. But there is no need for the computer to convert the
data it gathers into a visual image, a two-dimensional represen-
tation of visual data. Instead, it processes the zeros and ones of
its machine-readable data to calculate how it should respond
to its surroundings. If we can even call this an image, it is a very
different kind of image to the ones we are used to seeing in art
museums, on the front of magazines or in YouTube videos and
Instagram feeds. The car may well represent the data in visual
form on a screen for the driver or passengers to see, but this
representation is not necessary for the car to function.
    A useful distinction can be made here between representa-
tional images, where the main point of the image is to show
something, and operational images, where the main point is
to do something. A snapshot from a family holiday or a paint-
ing on a gallery wall is a representation, whereas the images
captured by the camera of a self-driving car are operational.
    The term operative image was coined by the filmmaker
Harun Farocki in 2001 in connection with his artwork Eye/
Machine. In 2004 he defined the term more explicitly: opera-
tive images ‘are images that do not represent an object, but
rather are part of an operation.’ In 2014, the artist Trevor
Paglen developed the idea further:

     [T]he machines were starting to see for themselves. Harun
     Farocki was one of the first to notice that image-making
     machines and algorithms were poised to inaugurate a new
     visual regime. Instead of simply representing things in the
     world, the machines and their images were starting to ‘do’
     things in the world.24
                          Introduction                        17

In practice, many images are both representational and opera-
tional. For instance, passport photographs have been used
for more than a century as a means of verifying the bearer’s
identity and are representations of the bearer’s face. With elec-
tronic processing of passports, the photos are also stored in
databases where they can be processed and used for automatic
identity verification. There is still a photograph representing
your face in your passport, but more important is the digi-
tally stored information about your face that is processed by a
computer and compared to the data captured by the camera as
you stand waiting for the gate to open. This digitally processed
photograph is operational.
   The ‘operational images’ that are generated and processed
by the autonomous car or the passport gates at the airport,
or by any number of other machines, are clearly not repre-
sentational in the sense that the Mona Lisa or a movie are
representations. But they are still constructed. The very act of
deciding which data to collect shapes that data. The original
‘Blue Marble’ image, the photograph of the earth as seen from
space, first released by NASA in 1972, was a snapshot captured
on an analogue camera by an astronaut. But, as Laura Kurgan
discussed in her book Close Up at a Distance, newer ‘pho-
tographs’ of the Earth as seen from space are the product of
data processing rather than the capture of light that we know
from analogue or optical photography. In these photorealistic
images of an Earth with no cloud cover and perfect lighting,
there is no direct relationship between what we see in the
images produced by machine vision and the real world. It’s
a ‘god trick’, as Haraway would say. Truth in such images is
no longer a question of ‘seeing is believing’. Instead, as Laura
Kurgan wrote, truth ‘is intimately related to resolution, to
measurability, to the construction of a reliable algorithm for
translating between representation and reality.’25
   Once we realise that images aren’t just representational, we
can begin to think more about what else images can do. If we
18                        Introduction

understand ‘operative images’ as images that contain data and
instructions for using that data, maybe we could say that all
images are operative: they encode visual information in a way
that can be processed by our eyes and brains and interpreted as
a representation of something actual or imagined. Abstract art
and architecture can cause us to feel in certain ways. We can
also think of diagrams, maps and visualisations as operative
images.
   Carolyn L. Kane sees the decline of representational
images as such a fundamental aspect of today’s society that
she calls our time post-optical, arguing that we no longer
use sight and visual elements as ends in themselves but as
means to another end.26 Kane is particularly interested in
colour, and she gives the example of chromakey video, where
producers use a blue or green background – not because it
will look good in the final image but so that the colour will
‘negate itself’, as Kane writes: the blue or green pixels will
be replaced by another background image. In brain imaging,
synthetic fluorescent proteins are inserted so that the final
image can display the colourful flows to map brain function.
Colour used to give us information to help us interpret our
surroundings, but its function has changed: ‘Color is not
exclusively about vision’, as Kane writes. ‘Rather, it is a system
of control used to manage and discipline perception and
thus reality.’
   Kane’s term ‘post-optical’ is a nod to Friedrich Kittler’s
monumental book Optical Media, a book composed of
lectures he gave in 1999 on the material and technological
development of media. Optical media, in Kittler’s framework,
are media that can be seen and interpreted by the human eye
at any point. Kittler never uses the term ‘post-optical’, but he
describes the concept in his discussion of electronic media
such as television: ‘In contrast to film, television was already
no longer optics. It is possible to hold a film reel up to the sun
and see what every frame shows. It is possible to intercept
                          Introduction                        19

television signals, but not to look at them, because they only
exist as electronic signals.’27
   Contemporary machine vision is certainly post-optical in
this sense. The computationally processed sensor data that
allows a self-driving car to navigate is not something we can
look at or perceive in any straightforward manner. When an AI
model trained on hundreds of thousands of images classifies
new images, it calculates statistical probabilities that an image
represents a specific object. It doesn’t produce explanations
why.
   This book builds upon the work of many other scholars. There
are excellent books on specific machine vision technologies,
such as Mark Andrejevic and Neil Selwyn’s Facial Recognition
and Graham Meikle’s Deepfakes, or Lila Lee-Morrison’s
Portraits of Automated Facial Recognition: On Machinic Ways
of Seeing the Face. Anthony McCosker and Rowan Wilken’s
Automating Vision: The Social Implications of the New Camera
Consciousness explores the social impact of smart cameras
across domains ranging from surveillance and facial recog-
nition to drones and self-driving cars. Other books focus on
specific uses of technologies, such as Thomas Stubblefield’s
art history take in Drone Art: The Everywhere War as Medium,
Julia Hildebrand’s analysis of drones as a mobile medium in
Aerial Play: Drone Medium, Mobility, Communication, and
Culture or Arthur Michel’s popular science account of satellite
surveillance in Eyes in the Sky: The Secret Rise of Gorgon Stare
and How it Will Watch Us All. My own book Seeing Ourselves
through Technology discussed selfies and how we use technolo-
gies to see ourselves and shape our ideas of who we are and want
to be. Simone Browne’s Dark Matters: On the Surveillance of
Blackness shows how slavery and surveillance are interlinked
and how biometrics and machine vision today still embed this
racial violence. Kelly Gates’s 2011 book Our Biometric Future
was an early analysis of facial recognition and other biometric
technologies that remains useful. I have been inspired by the
20                        Introduction

connections Anne Friedberg made between linear perspective
and twenty-first-century visual technology in her 2006 book
The Virtual Window: From Alberti to Microsoft. I discuss books
written before digital technology was prevalent, such as Vilém
Flusser’s books on photography and Friedrich Kittler’s Optical
Media. I also build on N. Katherine Hayles’s work analysing
how computers are cognisers, as well as her writing on cyber-
semiotics that begins to explore how machines sense and make
sense of the world.


                    Structure of the book

Chapter 1 is about how we use technology to see more than
we can see with our own eyes. It starts with the first known
visual technology to be created by humans: an 8,000-year-old
polished stone mirror designed to be held in a hand. The chap-
ter follows the thread through glass lenses and telescopes to
photography and technologies that allow us to observe waves
that are outside the spectrum that is visible to humans, such as
x-rays, infrared, ultrasound or gravitational waves. The main
argument in this chapter is that the desire to see more generally
situates technology as a tool that can expand humans’ access
to the world. We assume that we are in charge, and that these
technologies augment our abilities without really altering us.
However, by examining these technologies in detail, I show
how human agency is far more entwined with our technologies
than we may imagine. These technologies are more than just
tools; they affect us.
   Chapter 2 explores how we use technology to see differently.
How do machines perceive the world? I analyse two twentieth-
century cases where the camera is framed as autonomous and
of seeing differently to humans: the early Soviet Kinoks collec-
tive’s kino-eye and Vilém Flusser’s theory of the camera that
programs the human operator. Following N. Katherine Hayles,
                          Introduction                         21

I use biosemiotics to better understand how humans and other
animals see in situated and specific ways and cybersemiotics to
think about how machines sense the world.
    Chapter 3 is about the human dream of being able to see
everything. I explore this dream of omnivoyance through a
case study: the debate about the implementation of automated
licence plate readers in Oak Park, a neighbourhood just out-
side Chicago’s city limits. The chapter analyses how the rapid
introduction of automated surveillance cameras in the United
States is deeply embedded in local contexts such as the his-
tory of the community, local politics, perceptions of safety and
community support, and fear. Machine vision is situated not
just in the materiality of the technology but also in the assem-
blages of which it is part.
    Chapter 4 is about being seen and how machine vision sees
us. I explore the algorithmic gaze of machine vision watching
humans through three case studies. First, I discuss selfie filters
and the ways biometrics and facial recognition algorithms
conceive of human faces, framing facial recognition and emo-
tion recognition as having a normalising gaze. My second case
study explores how machine vision is used to automate grocery
shopping, library access and other interactions that previously
required us to collaborate with other humans. Finally, I explore
a fictional example of a benevolent AI dictator, Thunderhead,
from Neal Shusterman’s young adult series of novels The Arc
of the Scythe. These analyses of how we are seen by machine
vision also deepen my argument that it is the assemblage as a
whole that sees, not the technology alone.
    Chapter 5 is about the blind spots of machine vision and
how in many cases it sees less than humans. This chapter dis-
cusses the figure of the trickster hero in stories who fools and
evades machine vision and of the rebel who fights and refuses
it. I consider folk theories about how image recognition works
and how to evade it, together with adversarial techniques that
make deep-learning algorithms fail to recognise an image,
22                        Introduction

ranging from artist and activist projects to computer science
strategies. I also examine how human bodies are made more
legible to machines and the dangers of governing through data
in this way.
   The conclusion is titled ‘Hope’. Despite the fear and anxiety
in chapter 3 and the oppression in chapter 5, I want to hold
on to what gives me hope for the future. The many stories of
tricksters and rebels give me hope, as do the playful and artistic
experiments that explore how we can see the world in new
ways.
   To conclude this introduction, I want to say that my words
in this book are situated in my personal and professional
experience and knowledge, which is partial and limited like
everybody else’s. This limitation is often a strength, because
I am able to analyse specific machine vision situations such
as smart surveillance in an American neighbourhood as an
outsider who becomes more and more a part of the situation.
But there are also many situations of which I have no knowl-
edge. I am a cis, heterosexual white woman who grew up in
Australia and Norway speaking English and Norwegian. I stud-
ied in Norway and have worked as a researcher and teacher in
universities in Norway and the United States. I know far more
about European and Anglo-American-Australian cultural his-
tory than any other traditions. In this book I have tried to be
aware of this rather than taking it for granted, and to seek out
diversity when possible.
   I should also note that I use ‘we’ quite often. I want to write
conversationally and to speak directly to you, the person read-
ing this book. Often the ‘we’ in this book refers to you and
me: the reader and writer. You and I are both moving through
these words, but of course our experiences are not the same,
neither of the words in this book nor of the world in general.
The pronoun ‘we’ can be dangerous – it’s easy to assume that I
am part of a universal ‘we’ and that everyone in that ‘we’ expe-
riences the world as I do. The universal ‘we’ can be oppressive.
                          Introduction                        23

It might appear to be the opposite of the situated knowledge I
want to share. But ‘we’ can also be open and fluid. In chapter
2 I analyse a manifesto written by the Soviet filmmaker col-
lective the Kinoks, where the ‘we’ and the ‘I’ that narrate the
text slip between many meanings: one human, many humans,
the humans and machines, perhaps the machines alone.
We-narratives – that is, stories told in the first-person plural
– have received more and more attention in literary studies
in recent years.28 I think the reason for this is our growing
sense that we are not primarily autonomous individuals but
participants in networks, assemblages that shift and change.
In this book, ‘we’ sometimes means you and I, sometimes a
group of humans, sometimes humans and machines together.
Sometimes you won’t feel part of my ‘we’, and that’s OK. ‘We’
emphasises the relationships between us. When I use ‘we’,
please think of it as an invitation, as a touch of companionship,
not as a brute force tool claiming everyone is the same.
   Finally, I am situated as a human being. Readers of a draft
of this manuscript commented that it seemed quite human-
centric for a book about assemblages that uses posthumanist
theory and aims to avoid thinking of humans as humanist
master subjects using technologies as objects and tools. It’s
true: I write about how humans use technology to see more,
to see differently. While I do think it’s important to de-centre
the human and to acknowledge that we are just one of many
species, I can’t help but see the world through human eyes,
although I also see with technology. Being part of an assem-
blage doesn’t mean I am no longer also myself. Being part of an
assemblage means that I am bound to others, that I influence
and am influenced by others. So, yes, this book is human-
centric in that it is written by a human for other humans. It
will no doubt also be used as training data for future machine
learning models, so read by machines, but the ‘you’ in my mind
when I write is a human reader, not an AI. Similarly to the
way I use we to emphasise the relationship between you and
24                       Introduction

me, I try in this book to emphasise the relationship between
us humans and the technologies we use. Most importantly, I
want to see technology not as an object that can be studied in
isolation but as something that does different things in differ-
ent assemblages. I’ll be returning to this point throughout the
book.
                               1

              Seeing More:
         Histories of Augmenting
              Human Vision


The first visual technologies were fire, water and stone. Fire
allowed early humans to create light in darkness for the first
time, so they could see in the dark. Still water in ponds and
bowls provided a reflecting surface with which our ancestors
could see themselves. Thousands of years later, the natural
mirror of water was supplemented by mirrors of polished
stone. The first mirror we know of that was manufactured
rather than found was made of polished obsidian in Anatolia
(now in Turkey) 8,000 years ago.1 It is shaped like a half sphere
and sized so it can be held in a hand, and it has been polished
so brightly that it reflects a face quite superbly.
   Technology has been used for millennia, then, to help us to
see more. Humans cannot see well in the dark, so we light up
our surroundings with fire or electricity, or we design night-
vision goggles and infrared detectors to augment our vision.
Humans cannot see our own faces, so we look into ponds,
we polish stone. We use glass and silver to make mirrors. We
use smartphones with front-facing cameras to take selfies and
employ selfie lenses and filters to see what our faces would look
like if we were older or younger or more beautiful, or if we had
dog’s ears and a tongue.
26                        Seeing More

    Seeing more also means capturing that which we see. From
cave paintings to cinema, humans have developed ways to
record the visual. Over time we have devised how to record
the visual more precisely, to see more detail or to see things we
cannot see with our own eyes. For instance, humans perceive
flickering that is faster than fifty light pulses per second as
continuous movement, whereas a machine, or for that matter
a bird, can distinguish individual pulses at a much higher fre-
quency. A bird can clearly see the exact movements of a horse’s
legs when it gallops.2 Those galloping legs appear as a blur to
us humans, or, rather, they were a blur to us until they were
captured perfectly by the first high-speed cameras. I’ll return
to how those photos changed our perception soon.
    This chapter is about how humans interact with technology
to see more. I begin with ancient histories of the first lenses
used for magnification and then move to Renaissance histories
of camera obscuras and linear perspective, because these led to
the development of telescopes, cameras and the very idea that
objective visual representations of the world might be pos-
sible. These forms of machine vision aim primarily to augment
and improve human vision, to see more, without fundamen-
tally altering the way we see. These technologies are typically
framed as tools, but I argue that, even with these relatively
simple and pre-algorithmic machine vision technologies, there
is an intertwining of human–machine assemblages.
    You may be wondering what ancient mirrors and prisms
have to do with the images generated by twenty-first-century
deep-learning algorithms. I think they are a necessary founda-
tion for understanding how we interact with technology today.
Obviously the technology of polished stone or glass, or even
nineteenth-century photography, is very different from the
neural networks of our time. But to understand how auto-
mated machine vision works today, we need to understand
the relationships between humans and these earlier technolo-
gies. Looking back at the long history of human–technology
                         Seeing More                        27

relationships allows us to better understand the shifting roles
of humans and technologies and to see how machine vision
technologies are part of assemblages. Understanding differ-
ences over time and across cultures also helps us understand
today’s technology.
   Machine vision is about more than technology: it is an
assemblage of human bodies, human culture and technol-
ogy. Human bodies and eyes share a basic anatomy that
we need to consider when analysing how humans see with
machine vision. The cultural context is also important in the
assemblage into which a specific human or group of humans
enters with a specific machine vision technology. The tech-
nology is also important, of course, whether it is a polished
stone mirror or the algorithms that enhance the selfies you
take on your smartphone. In this chapter, I want to show you
how thinking about the stone mirror helps us understand
the algorithms.


   The relationship between humans and technology

The 8,000-year-old obsidian mirror was carved into a half-
sphere that comfortably fits in a human hand. Imagine holding
that ancient mirror 8,000 years ago. Imagine you have never
seen your own face, not in a mirror, not in a photograph. You
would hold the stone in your hand, look into its polished sur-
face and see your own face reflected in it as you had never
before seen yourself. Today we hold our smartphones in much
the same way to take a selfie or video chat with a friend.
   Humans have a very close relationship to technology, and
a very embodied relationship. We hold the mirror, the phone,
up to our faces and we see ourselves. It is easy to think of
technology as a tool, as something that we look at or look
through. I find it more useful to think of technology as a com-
panion,3 as something that has an agency of a kind. When
28                        Seeing More

we use technology we enter into a relationship with it. That
relationship affects us, it affects the technology, and it affects
the people and environment around us.
   When a person picked up that mirror 8,000 years ago and
looked at their reflection in it, they became part of an assem-
blage consisting of the mirror, the person looking into it, and
the people around who were commenting on it: laughing or
maybe gasping in awe. It is easy to imagine the mirror being
passed around a group, or perhaps being treated as something
sacred or special, requiring rituals and careful handling. The
weight of the stone would also influence the ways a person
could use the mirror.
   When I pick up my smartphone to make a TikTok video
using a nifty filter, I enter into an assemblage consisting of
myself, my phone, and the algorithm that alters my face. We
could go further, as Jane Bennett does when analysing the
assemblage that makes up the electrical grid in the USA,4 and
include the company that owns TikTok, people who will see
my video, and participants in the production chain that built
my phone and mined the rare minerals required for its battery.
Perhaps we should even include the laws that regulate its use.
To understand how we see with machine vision, we need to
understand the whole assemblage.
   Understanding relationships between humans and tech-
nologies as assemblages between human and non-human
agents is common in contemporary critical theory. It can
be traced back to Deleuze and Guattari’s work in the 1980s
and 1990s and was developed in a more structured way in
actor-network theory in the early 1990s by STS (science and
technology studies) scholars such as Madeleine Akrich, Bruno
Latour and John Law. Actor-network theory was, among other
things, a response to the ‘technological determinism’ of many
scholars, ranging from the mid-twentieth-century Frankfurt
School to 1970s apparatus theory in cinema studies or to North
American media ecologists in the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s.
                         Seeing More                        29

    One of the most cited examples of technological determin-
ism comes from Lynn White’s book Medieval Technology and
Social Change, published in 1962. White, who was a historian of
technology, argued that feudalism was made possible because
of the invention of the stirrup. The argument went like this:
stirrups allowed the use of horses in battle. Mounted soldiers
win battles against foot soldiers, but it is far more expensive
to maintain a mounted army. Therefore the rich, who could
afford to keep and train soldiers who fought on horseback,
won more battles and gained more power. This led to the social
structure of feudalism.5
    Media ecologists such as Marshall McLuhan, Harold Innis
and Neil Postman have also been described as technological
determinists. Postman, who coined the term media ecology in
1970,6 saw media as an environment that structures our experi-
ences, while McLuhan saw media as a prosthesis: not a simple
tool we can pick up and use, but an extension of the human (or,
in his mid-twentieth-century thinking, of man) that changes
us. Julia Hildebrand takes a media ecological approach in her
2021 book on drones as a mobile medium, and Sy Taffel’s book
Digital Media Ecologies explicitly updates media ecology for
computational media.7 My arguments in this book have a lot
in common with media ecology. I agree with Postman’s argu-
ment that media technologies change human perception, but
I find it more generative to understand this through the post-
humanist understanding of assemblages because they allow a
more balanced relationship between human and machine. In
McLuhan and Postman’s media ecology, the human remains
central: media is the human’s extension or environment. I want
to focus instead on the relationships between participants in
machine–human assemblages.
    Vilém Flusser’s evocative book on photography, which I’ll
discuss in chapter 2, is strongly technodeterminist. Flusser
argues that the apparatus of the camera makes the photog-
rapher no more than an ‘operator’, with no more agency in
30                        Seeing More

taking a photo than a person tossing dice. The camera allows
for a fixed set of possible photographs, and the photographer,
or operator, simply actualises one of these possibilities.8 I have
to admit, it does sometimes feel that way. It’s not just the
technology that steers us to take certain kinds of photograph,
though: our cultural and social experiences are also impor-
tant. In Seeing Ourselves through Technology I wrote about the
technological and cultural filters that encourage certain sorts
of photos above others. Social media can also heighten the
uniformity, both by showing us more examples of what our
photos ‘should’ look like and by algorithmically prioritising
certain kinds of images, making these more visible and hiding
those that do not fit the desired pattern.9
    Flusser uses the term apparatus to refer to the material
camera and its program. In apparatus theory in 1970s cinema
studies, the term came to be used more broadly. These under-
standings of the ‘cinematic apparatus’ go beyond the camera and
its mechanics and can include the economic system of cinema
or, for scholars inspired by psychoanalytic theory, the ‘libidinal
exchange’ between spectators and screens. The general idea of
apparatus theory is technologically determinist and assumes
that spectators are passive recipients of a powerful medium.
Laura Mulvey’s description of the ‘male gaze’ of cinema, which
I mention at the start of chapter 4, can be seen as an example
of apparatus theory, and Jean-Louis Baudry is a central figure.10
    Clearly technology does influence what is possible and,
although humans do invent and adopt technology, clearly not
all its consequences are intended by their inventors. The inven-
tor of the automobile presumably did not foresee that it would
lead to the establishment of suburbs and commuters. When
Mark Zuckerberg launched TheFacebook in 2004, he probably
did not realise his platform would be accused of influencing
elections and spreading fake news.
    In the 1980s and 1990s scholarship moved away from tech-
nodeterminism. In cultural studies and media studies, scholars
                         Seeing More                         31

began to point out all the ways that audiences were not passive
masses at all but very active participants. In science and tech-
nology studies (STS), the technodeterminist argument that
technology determines our actions was increasingly opposed
by social constructivism, the argument that all technology is
socially constructed and therefore determined by people and
societies. As Donald MacKenzie and Judy Wajcman write
in the introduction to the second edition of their influential
anthology The Social Shaping of Technology, ‘The view that
technology just changes, either following science or of its own
accord, promotes a passive attitude to technological change. It
focuses our minds on how to adapt to technological change,
not on how to shape it.’11
   While I agree with a lot of the technodeterminists’ argu-
ments, these schools of thought don’t sufficiently explain how
technologies have such different effects in different contexts,
and understanding that is one of my goals in writing this book.
Surveillance cameras in supermarkets, for example, work quite
differently in an Amazon Fresh store in Chicago than they
do in a small town by a Norwegian fjord. The invention of
surveillance cameras and neural networks might not always
lead to surveillance capitalism. I find the idea of assemblages
more useful than technological determinism to understand
this, because assemblages emphasise relationships and shared
agency over the binary divide between an active subject and
a passive object. That binary is misleading in either case –
whether, like the technological determinists, you think of
technology as an active subject that treats humans as objects
or whether you take the opposite view, thinking of the human
inventors and users as active subjects using technology as
objects.
   The term ‘assemblage’ elegantly sidesteps the debate between
technodeterminists and social constructivists. Deleuze and
Guattari intriguingly wrote, in A Thousand Plateaus in 1980,
about ‘machinic assemblages’ but never really defined them.
32                        Seeing More

Their prose is famously fluid and rhizomatic and can be read
‘starting anywhere’, they wrote, asking readers to dip in and
out of the volume of more than 600 pages.12 A clear definition
would have been out of character. ‘Machinic’, for Deleuze and
Guattari, refers not to mechanical machines but to the way the
different components of an assemblage work together. Even
a book is a machinic assemblage, as they write of their own
text: ‘There are no individual statements, there never are. Every
statement is the product of a machinic assemblage, in other
words, of collective agents of enunciation (take “collective
agents” to mean not peoples or societies but multiplicities)’
(p. 2).
   I am inspired also by N. Katherine Hayles, who in 2006
proposed the term cognitive assemblages to describe the
interactions between humans and technical systems where
cognition is the shared element. Hayles defines cognition as
‘a process of interpreting information in contexts that con-
nect it with meaning’, which is something shared by humans,
animals and many machines. Humans also have more complex
thought processes, of course, and I’ll return to the question of
cognition and sensing in chapter 2. For now, a key point is that
Hayles’s definition of cognition centres sensing, which brings
us back to machine vision. Let’s unpack her definition using
a simple example: when I use FaceID to unlock my phone,
my iPhone uses its camera and infrared sensors to input (or
sense) information about my face. It processes or interprets
that data in a context by comparing it to its saved data about
my face, and connects it with meaning by determining that it is
indeed me, leading it to unlock my phone. Hayles’s definition
of cognition is particularly useful for understanding machine
vision technologies because of this focus on the sensing and
processing of data. In a cognitive assemblage, the cognitive
decisions of each participant in the assemblage affect the other
participants, whether they are human or not.13 Thinking of
the group as an assemblage rather than as a network (as in
                           Seeing More                           33

actor-network theory) emphasises what Hayles calls ‘conti-
guity in a fleshly sense – touching, incorporating, repelling,
mutating’.14
   To really understand machine vision, we can’t focus only on
cognition, though. In this book I will include other participants
beyond humans and machines, such as racist histories, trusting
or distrusting cultures, regulations and policies, fears or desires,
and physical infrastructure and the natural environment – for
example, fjords, cul-de-sacs and expressways. It would be
difficult to argue that an expressway has technical cognition,
although it can certainly impact us, as is evocatively expressed
in Nnedi Okorafor’s novel Lagoon, where the Lagos–Benin
Expressway has ‘named itself Bone Collector’ and is a monster
hungry for human flesh: ‘Concrete that smelled like fresh hot
tar . . . and blood’.15 If we want to understand specific tech-
nologies, we need to include participants such as expressways
in the assemblages. The Kennedy Expressway in Chicago is a
participant in the surveillance assemblage I discuss in chapter
3: extensive surveillance of the expressway causes would-be-
criminals to go elsewhere to commit their crimes, and its
design allows people to speed off the road into quiet residential
streets.
   In this book I therefore use assemblage in the fluid, open-
ended mode of theorists such as Jane Bennett, Rosi Braidotti
and Anna Tsing,16 using N. Katherine Hayles’s definition of
cognition to understand how agency is distributed between
humans, machines and other participants in assemblages.
Deleuze, his translator writes, aimed to coin terms that ‘do not
add up to a system of belief . . . but instead pack a potential in
the way a crowbar in a willing hand envelopes an energy of
prying.’ That generative potential is my goal in using the term
‘assemblage’.
   Now that you have an idea of what I mean by an assemblage,
let’s look at another historical example of machine vision:
lenses to correct our vision.
34                         Seeing More

     Using glass and crystal lenses to see more clearly

When I was a child, I could see the eye of a needle perfectly. I
still remember the pride I felt at being able to thread a needle
with no trouble and how surprised I was when older people
told me that they couldn’t see the eye of the needle and needed
me to thread it for them. Now I struggle to see the eye of a
needle myself, and even multifocal contact lenses don’t quite
bring back my childhood vision.
   Contact lenses and glasses are visual technologies that cor-
rect our vision, and corrective lenses are one of the first visual
technologies. Today we use standardised charts and instru-
ments to measure human visual acuity, but these quantitative
measures cannot always measure visual function or the way we
experience our own vision. One ancient test of vision, used in
Persia to test elite soldiers, is simply to look at the stars and see
whether you can see the double star in the tail of the Plough
(US: Big Dipper) in the constellation Ursa Major. The star test
has been found to identify 20/20 vision as reliably as a modern
eye exam and may be more effective in discerning high visual
function rather than just visual acuity.17 If you live north of
South Africa, Argentina or Brisbane, you can try it next time
you’re out on a starry night. Once you’ve found the Plough,
look for the second star from the end of its handle or tail.
That’s Mizar. Look carefully, and you may see Alcar, the fainter
star close to Mizar. I can’t see it, not even with my multifocal
contacts. But my kids could when I asked them last time we
went camping. ‘That’s Alcar,’ I told them. ‘You can see well
enough to be archers in the ancient Persian army!’
   It would have been difficult to effectively correct the vision
of a soldier in ancient Persia, but magnification for more sed-
entary tasks such as reading or fine handcraft certainly existed.
Water was used for magnification as well as for reflection,
and the ancient Romans were quite familiar with how look-
ing through water can alter the way we see. In his treatise on
                             Seeing More                                  35

Natural Questions, Seneca described how raindrops act as tiny
mirrors and, specifically, how tiny writing can be read more
easily when viewed through a sphere filled with water:

  I shall add that everything is much larger when one is looking
  through water: writing, however tiny and difficult, is seen larger
  and clearer through a glass sphere full of water; fruit appears
  more beautiful than it is if it is swimming in a glass bowl; the
  stars themselves seem larger when one looks at them through
  a cloud, because our eyesight falters in moisture and cannot
  reliably grasp what it wants to. This is plain if you fill a cup with
  water and drop a ring in it: for although the ring is lying on the
  bottom, its image is emitted on the surface of the water.18

Although spectacles and eyeglasses were not invented until the
late thirteenth century, lenses made of glass and, before that, of
crystal rock have been made and used for millennia. Magnifying
lenses of glass and crystal existed well before Seneca wrote
about using water, but archaeologists and historians have not
always recognised their purpose. When these lenses have been
found in archaeological digs, some scholars have assumed they
were simply used to concentrate sunlight to start a fire.19 Yes,
there are remarkably detailed engravings on coins and seals,
but these could have been done by young people with perfect
vision, much as I easily threaded my grandmother’s needle as
a child. However, archaeologists have also found lenses in an
engraver’s workshop in Pompei and an artist’s workshop in
Tanis. If engravers and artists needed lenses, it seems likely
they used them the better to see the details they were work-
ing on.20 There are many other examples of lenses that were
at first assumed to be decorative beads but which were later
shown to have optical properties. Even earlier than in ancient
Rome, around 4,500 years ago, there were Egyptian statues
with astoundingly detailed eyes. The Seated Scribe, which can
now be viewed in the Louvre, has eyes that are almost perfectly
36                        Seeing More

anatomically correct, with ground lenses, painted irises, a hole
for the pupil and copper sheets inside the ‘eyeball’, behind
the iris, which might have given a slight reddish glow like the
capillary veins in a human eye.21 To make such eyes not only
shows an astounding knowledge of human anatomy, it also
demonstrates great skill in lens-making. It seems likely that
this skill was also used to aid human vision, even 4,500 years
ago.
   Historically, glass lenses have been one of the most impor-
tant technologies needed for machine vision. Telescopes and
cameras need glass lenses to focus rays of light, and, although
computation is now arguably as or more important than the
physical lens in cameras, a lens of some kind has been needed
up until today. This may be changing: as I write this there are
prototypes of lensless cameras where deep-learning models
interpret light captured directly by sensors, potentially ena-
bling cameras at nano-scale.22 But, for thousands of years, glass
lenses have enabled us to see more than we can with the naked
eye.


       The camera obscura and recording images

Another early visual technology is the camera obscura, which
is named for a Latin term that, directly translated, means
‘darkened room’. If a room or box is darkened with just a tiny
hole allowing light to enter through one side, an image of what
is outside will be projected through the hole and shown in
reverse and upside down on the surface opposite to the hole.
Once an image is projected, it can be traced on to paper, or
canvas, or the hide of an animal, and an extremely accurate
two-dimensional rendition of a scene can thus be produced.
Camera obscuras may have been used as early as in the stone
age, but the first written mentions are in a text from the fourth
century bce ascribed to the Han Chinese philosopher Mozi.
                          Seeing More                         37

The observation that light streaming through a tiny hole pro-
jects an image is also made in ancient Greek texts, and in far
more detail in later Arabic writings.23 Camera obscuras were
used to develop geometric linear perspective in the fourteenth
century, and later, with lenses added, to produce highly accu-
rate drawings and paintings. The modern camera is not only a
direct descendant of the camera obscura, it also takes its name
from the far older technology.
   Camera obscuras allowed artists to make drawings that
were extremely accurate in terms of proportion and per-
spective. Most styles of art before linear perspective did not
emphasise realistic depiction of the world and did not try to
create a visual replica of what we actually see. Instead, art was
symbolic or decorative. For instance, medieval European art
would often show the most important people as larger than
less important characters. Indigenous Australians told stories
using sand drawings combined with words, songs and ges-
tures. Their sand drawings were patterns and symbols rather
than indexical representations meant to look like the thing
they represented.24 With linear perspective a new ideal of real-
ism was introduced that has continued into our own time.
Technical drawings, scientific technologies, photographs and
popular cinema spread it to new countries and cultures over
the course of several centuries. Today the assumption that
linear perspective provides an objective visual representation
of the world is embedded in global culture and, importantly for
this book, in contemporary machine vision technologies.
   There are other kinds of realism, and certainly other kinds
of visual communication and representation. Even a realistic
photograph of a beach, for instance, carries a lot of meaning
beyond the ‘objective’ depiction of what the beach looks like,
or even the more atmospheric elements in the photo, such as
whether the sun is setting or the sea is stormy. A good pho-
tograph uses colour, contrast, composition and other visual
elements to convey emotion and more.
38                         Seeing More

         Linear perspective and operative images

Imagine you are walking in the middle of a long, straight road.
The road stretches out in front of you towards the horizon.
The sides of the road are perfectly parallel. However, when
you look ahead, the sides of the road seem to converge into
a single vanishing point far ahead of you. Given that every
sighted human sees the world with this ‘vanishing point’ per-
spective, it is remarkable that none of us draws the world in
perspective until we are taught to do so.25 Humans who are
not trained in perspective tend either to draw objects that are
sized according to their importance or to arrange objects so
they can be clearly viewed or so the composition of the image
is balanced and pleasing to the eye. We may see the world in
perspective, but that is not necessarily how we remember it or
communicate it. Our brains interpret what we see in context,
emphasising whatever is important to us in the situation.26
You’ll notice that sounds rather similar to Hayles’s definition
of cognition which I explained a few pages ago: interpreting
information in context to create meaning.
    Linear perspective is a technique for representing three-
dimensional reality on a flat surface so that it looks the same
as it appears to the human eye. Linear perspective is important
for machine vision because it allows us to encode visual data
in a way that can be reliably decoded. It was invented in the
fifteenth century by Italian painters. In his book on its develop-
ment, the art historian Terry Edgerton explains that, although
humans don’t instinctively draw in linear perspective, our brains
do ‘innately sense geometric patterns in natural shapes’, and
almost all civilizations express this artistically through abstract
decoration using geometric patterns. This artistic use of geom-
etry was also at the heart of Italian Renaissance art. Edgerton
argues that medieval Christian ideas led artists to develop the
specific kind of geometric representation of linear perspective
where receding parallel lines meet at a distant vanishing point.27
                          Seeing More                          39

   The first paintings to use linear perspective were by the
Florentine artist and engineer Filippo Brunelleschi in 1425.
Both images have been lost, but we still have verbal descriptions
of them, and they had a great influence on art and visual repre-
sentation. To display the two paintings – two small pictures of
buildings in Florence – Brunelleschi placed a small hole in the
middle of the canvas and faced it towards a mirror. The viewer
would look through the peephole from the back to see the
mirror image of the painting fill their whole frame of view. It is
hard for us to imagine how startlingly realistic this image must
have looked to those who saw it first, since they had never
seen a perspective image in their lives. Peeking through a hole
would have increased the sense of immersion by blocking out
other visual input, similar to VR glasses today or the peephole
cinema of the nineteenth century. However, Edgerton argues
that the mirror is a religious choice. He believes Brunelleschi’s
mirror is a reference to St Paul, who wrote, ‘At present we
see indistinctly, as in a mirror, but then [in heaven] face to
face.’ Brunelleschi’s image thus reveals the divine order. The
technique also served, Edgerton argues, to create art that
can ‘present the Christian message more convincingly and
help shore up the sagging beliefs of an increasingly cynical
population.’28
   Linear perspective is basically an algorithm, a set of geo-
metrical rules that allows you to represent a 3D space or object
on a 2D surface. The rules were described in detail by Leon
Battista Alberti in his De pictura, first published in 1435, a
decade after Brunelleschi’s paintings. Alberti described per-
spective as though looking at a scene through a window that
has a grid painted on it to mark off regular squares. Edgerton
argues that this shift from Brunelleschi’s mirror to Alberti’s
window is significant, even if Alberti may not have intended
it as such, because ‘it subtly shifted the object of perspective
painting away from “mirroring” nature as if it were a mere
reflection of God’s true brilliance in heaven, to seeing Nature
40                            Seeing More

instead as if through an open window, not as a divine mystery
revealed by geometry, but as worldly perfection framed by
geometry.’29
   In contemporary machine vision, linear perspective is still
being developed and refined, with new algorithms continually
being tested out. Most people are satisfied when photographs
‘look real’, or when we feel as though the image produced
shows the world as we perceive it ourselves. But this ‘real-
ness’ is not an objective quality built into our cameras and
algorithms. Instead, it is something that software developers
work very hard to achieve.30 Read, for instance, the following
description of a technique to make portrait photographs look
better by avoiding the too-large nose that is often seen in self-
ies due to the camera being held close to the face:

     Our approach fits a full perspective camera and a parametric
     3D head model to the portrait, and then builds a 2D warp in the
     image plane to approximate the effect of a desired change in 3D.
     We show that this model is capable of correcting objectionable
     artifacts such as the large noses sometimes seen in ‘selfies,’ or
     to deliberately bring a distant camera closer to the subject.31

Linear perspective is still being used and adapted to make
today’s machine vision technologies as convincingly realistic
as possible.
   The invention of linear perspective did more than revo-
lutionise art; it also enabled detailed technical drawings that
increased the speed of innovation. Previously, drawings were
made in a way that could help a skilled artisan to build an object,
but they would not have been possible to follow for someone
who was not already familiar with the structure. With linear
perspective, drawings began to be made to scale and with clear
representation in three dimensions.32 In the introduction, I
introduced the idea of images that are operative in contrast
to images that are representations. These technical drawings
                           Seeing More                            41

were among the first operative images. Linear perspective was
an algorithm that meant people could record visual data in a
way that allowed it to be systematically processed.
    Nearly two centuries later, in 1609, Galileo Galilei looked
through a simple telescope to see the moon. It’s easy to see
that machine vision technologies such as telescopes (which
are built with glass lenses and mirrors) made scientific study of
the world beyond our planet possible. Edgerton demonstrates
that Galileo’s artistic skill and, specifically, his knowledge of
linear perspective were also necessary. In 1609 the moon was
commonly believed to be a perfectly smooth sphere. It was
thought to be pure, ‘immaculata’, and closely connected to the
Virgin Mary. The first drawings of the moon made by indi-
viduals who saw it through a telescope represented it with
this imagined smoothness. If you look at the moon thinking
it is smooth, you might well assume the shadows you see on
the surface are simply connected to the ‘translucent internal
composition’ that the moon was believed to have at the time.33
Galileo, however, was trained in drawing in linear perspective,
which by the early 1600s was a complex art. Training manuals
of the time detailed elaborate systems for depicting spheres
with dozens of raised triangles, each with perfect shading for
its three-dimensional shape. Working through such exercises
must have helped Galileo to understand what he was seeing
when he drew the moon as he saw it through the telescope.
Unlike earlier moon-gazers, Galileo realised that the moon was
not flat at all, but that the shadows corresponded to mountains
and valleys. ‘And it is like the face of the Earth itself’, he wrote,
‘which is marked here and there with chains of mountains and
depths of valleys.’34 Galileo published his book Sidereus nun-
cius with detailed engravings of the moon just a few months
later, in 1610.
    Galileo used the algorithms of linear perspective to make
the images that he saw through his telescope operative. Linear
perspective was the software for the hardware of the telescope.
42                         Seeing More

Galileo didn’t just describe the beauty of the moon’s hills and
valleys; he also converted his observations into a geometric
diagram to estimate the height of the mountain peak based
on the length of the shadow it cast. This combination of art,
technology and mathematics spurred us on into the scientific
age, where machine vision technology allowed us to measure,
understand and control the world around us.
   Telescopes, microscopes and other material technologies
continued to develop through the next centuries. The algo-
rithms of linear perspective were joined by data visualisations
in the eighteenth and nineteenth century – another way that
images became operative rather than representative.35


          Seeing ourselves through photography

The invention of photography was a major step in the develop-
ment of machine vision technologies for many reasons. The
direct capture of light on film without a human doing the
calculations manually meant that cultural assumptions were
encoded in technology in a new way. Photography encoded
the software of linear perspective into the hardware of the
camera. It may seem anachronistic to call the calculations and
craft of linear perspective ‘software’, but thinking about these
pre-digital algorithms in this way helps us see the similarities
to the software that is hardcoded into our machine vision tech-
nologies today. At first, of course, it took a great deal of skill
and knowledge to produce a photograph, but by the late 1890s
consumer cameras were sold as being simple to use. ‘You press
the button, we do the rest’, was Kodak’s slogan from the 1880s
and for many years afterwards. This ease of use is still a feature
employed to sell cameras. Nearly a century after Kodak’s first
camera ads, in the 1980s, Pentax advertised their cameras with
a similar slogan: ‘It has a mind of its own, so it all but takes the
easy shots for you.’36
                          Seeing More                          43

   Culture can spread more easily through material artefacts
than through word of mouth alone, and especially thanks to
artefacts such as cameras that are programmed to produce
a particular outcome. When cameras spread throughout the
world, so did linear perspective. Cameras helped extend a
visual style of representing the world that emphasises a par-
ticular kind of realism and an idea of objectivity. They helped
to communicate colonialist and racist visual stereotypes. But
they were also used for self-expression, creativity and to work
against oppression.
   The first daguerreotype, according to legend at least,
appeared partly by chance. There was, all the history books
agree, a lot of research and experimentation leading up to
the invention of photography. Many separate inventors were
intrigued by the idea of capturing the images projected in a
camera obscura, and many different techniques were trialled.
Nicéphore Niépce discovered in 1816 how to create a last-
ing form of the projected image in a camera obscura using
paper coated with silver chloride, but it was a negative. After
Niépce’s death, his collaborator Louis Daguerre continued to
experiment. The story I’m about to tell you is one of those
accounts often repeated in online histories and popular books
about photography where sources are a little vague, like the
one about how Aristotle invented the camera obscura, which
would be lovely but appears to be rather a stretch of the
imagination, despite the same exact supposed anecdote being
repeated many places. Kittler tells this story about the inven-
tion of the daguerreotype in Optical Media, citing a history of
photography first published in 1903 that mentions and repeats
almost word for word a narrative published in 1865 that unfor-
tunately cites no sources.37
   In any case, the story goes like this: Daguerre, working with
sheets of silver treated with iodine, had left an exposed sheet in
a cupboard. When he opened the cupboard he was surprised
to discover that an image had appeared on it. He figured one
44                        Seeing More

of the other chemicals in the cupboard must have reacted with
the treated silver and developed the photograph so it became
visible, but which chemical? He tried reproducing the experi-
ment again, placing newly exposed sheets of iodised silver in
the cupboard and removing chemical after chemical, until he
finally realised it must be the fumes from an uncovered bowl of
mercury at the bottom of the cupboard that caused the reac-
tion. Sure enough: to make a daguerreotype you take a sheet
of silver-plated copper, expose it to light in a camera and then
fume it with mercury vapour to make the image appear. You
still have to use a chemical treatment to remove the light sen-
sitivity of the metal and rinse the chemicals off, but discovering
that mercury fumes develop the image was an important step.
   Describing this incident, Kittler notes that this coincidence
could not have happened without a great deal of human inven-
tion beforehand, as it required the existence of a cupboard full
of chemicals. But once they exist, Kittler continues, ‘artificial
substances or machines are able to react to one another with-
out human intervention.’38 Kittler presents himself as more of
a technological determinist than science and technology schol-
ars such as Akrich and Latour or philosophers such as Deleuze
and Guattari, who write about assemblages between humans
and machines. But this example of the silver-plated copper and
mercury fumes that coincidentally made the first photographic
image is a beautiful example of non-human agency, where the
chemicals are components in an assemblage that includes
Daguerre, a human scientist who not only happened to keep
the chemicals in his cupboard but who was also able to use
the scientific method to discover the chain of the events. As
Kittler points out, two hundred years earlier the event might
have been classified as witchcraft or a miracle. Daguerre, being
versed in the scientific method, instead methodically tested
what was needed to make it take place again.
   The story about the mercury just happening to be in
Daguerre’s cupboard may or may not be true, but it is quite
                            Seeing More                            45

clear that many different processes were being tried out
around this time by different people, all experimenting with
different chemicals and processes to reduce the exposure
time required and to create an image that would not fade. The
idea of the photograph existed well before Daguerre, Niépce,
Talbot, Herschel, Florence, Bayard and their fellow inventors.
As Emerling writes in his History of Photography, their shared
‘desire to fix and retain an image that was conceived as given
rather than to create or construct a representation’39 was a
driving force. This desire was shaped by the combination of
technologies such as linear perspective and the camera obscura
with the development of the scientific method and precise
measurements of many kinds. Or we might say that photog-
raphy is the child of the ‘optical naturalism of the Renaissance
tradition’, as Yi Gu describes it in a paper on early Chinese
photography.40
   Photography rapidly spread through the world. By 1840,
portrait studios were opened in New York, New Orleans, Hong
Kong and many other cities,41 and different styles emerged.
British photographers in the 1870s described an aesthetics
among Chinese photographers that differed from Western
expectations. The Brits interpreted this as caused by the
Chinese finding the camera lacking: ‘The camera, you see, is
defective. It . . . won’t recognize our laws of art.’42 It is possible
that this kind of statement was an expression of the colonial
anxiety of British photographers rather than representative of
actual nineteenth-century Chinese attitudes to photography.
However, Yi Gu’s analysis of how the words for ‘photogra-
phy’ in Chinese changed over time supports the idea that
early photography was understood differently in China than
in the West, and that the boundaries between photography
and other visual forms of expression were far more fluid there.
Retouching photographs was common among all nineteenth-
century photographers, but Gu describes how, in China,
‘photographic prints were often inscribed with calligraphy and
46                        Seeing More

occasionally even mounted on silk.’ There were ‘conspicuous
signs of retouching with an ink brush’, and popular motifs
from ink-brush painting, such as bamboo or plum, were added
to the prints. Rather than correcting perceived deficits, as in
the West, Chinese retouching ‘adjusted photographs to meet
the visual conventions of painting’, Gu writes.43
   Photography also proved to be a weapon of colonialism,
where colonisers took photographs of colonised peoples and
places in ways that perpetuated stereotypes. The reproduc-
tion of photographs on postcards and in magazines, books and
newspapers meant that these stereotypes spread internation-
ally, showing a particular version of cultures that supported
the colonisers’ narratives rather than the self-understanding
of the colonised peoples. Okechukwu C. Nwafor describes
nineteenth-century photographs of Africans as the ‘imprison-
ment of a moving time into immovable spaces’.44
   A photograph is a captured moment in time that can
exclude more than it includes and is often entirely staged.
But, like data, photographs feel real. As Susan Sontag wrote,
‘Photographed images do not seem to be statements about the
world so much as pieces of it, miniatures of reality that anyone
can make or acquire.’45 Sontag also wrote about photography
as a form of power: ‘To photograph is to appropriate the thing
photographed. It means putting oneself into a certain relation
to the world that feels like knowledge – and, therefore, like
power.’46 In this way, photography, and especially the mass
reproduction and distribution of images, quite directly shaped
peoples’ idea of what the world beyond their immediate sur-
roundings looked like.
   To see oneself through photographs taken by others can
feel like a violence. W. E. B. Du Bois wasn’t writing specifically
about photography when in 1903 he described the ‘double con-
sciousness’ of African Americans, ‘this sense of always looking
at one’s self through the eyes of others’,47 but photographs
were certainly a way of cementing particular representations
                            Seeing More                                 47

of groups of people with whom the viewers of the photographs
might never have direct contact. Frederick Douglass, the great
orator and, after escaping slavery, a leader of the American
abolitionist movement, wrote of these cruel caricatures:

  Negroes can never have impartial portraits at the hands of
  white artists. It seems to us next to impossible for white men to
  take likenesses of black men, without most grossly exaggerat-
  ing their distinctive features. And the reason is obvious. Artists,
  like all other white persons, have developed a theory dissecting
  the distinctive features of Negro physiognomy. We have heard
  many white persons say, that ‘Negroes look all alike.’48

This is yet another example of how a visual technology such as
photography can make the world look different to us depend-
ing on the context in which it is used – that is, the other
participants in the assemblage of which it is an element. The
camera was part of the assemblage creating racist caricatures
of African Americans, but so were racism and the nineteenth-
century interest in physiognomy.
   Physiognomy is the idea that the physical shape of a per-
son’s body directly relates to their intelligence and personality.
Although thoroughly discredited today, physiognomy was
accepted as a legitimate science in the mid-nineteenth century,
and photography was used to develop and ‘prove’ its theories.
Some of the legacy of physiognomy is still present in today’s
facial recognition systems: the idea that the human face can
be divided into separate parts that each bear meaning. In the
1870s, the French criminologist Alphonse Bertillon developed
a system of ‘anthropometrics’ which combined a photographic
portrait (the origin of mugshots) with a system for standardised
measurements and descriptions of the human face and body.
Mushon Zer-Aviv’s digital art installation The Normalizing
Machine demonstrates how this legacy persists in facial rec-
ognition. I experienced the work at an exhibition I helped
48                         Seeing More

organise at the University Museum in Bergen in 2021. I stepped
in front of a camera with a screen below it. The screen showed
me two photos of people who had recently visited the museum
and asked me to select the one that was ‘more normal’. After
I had made several selections, it showed me a photo of myself
and another person and asked again: ‘Which person is more
normal?’ Once I had made this rather awkward choice, the
image of my face moved to another screen, where it was placed
in a projection of a nineteenth-century-style form, reminiscent
of the those Bertillon used for his anthropometrics. My photo
was rapidly analysed, with numbers showing estimates of my
gender, age, hair colour, and so on. Then the image was divided
up into segments, and images of my eyes, my chin, my nose
were moved over to another screen with a large collection of
isolated facial features from many faces, each with a number
stating their level of normality. The Normalizing Machine was
shown next to a display explaining Bertillon’s nineteenth-cen-
tury photographic system. I found one of the most interesting
aspects of the work to be the contrast between the playful fun
at the start and the rather disturbing sight at the end of my face
being sliced up into segments and then sorted and compared
to everybody else. A lot of machine vision technology works
like that. It’s fun to take silly selfies, but then your face becomes
data and can be used to identify or analyse you or for selling
ads or training a facial recognition system.
   Although contemporary facial recognition may seem dis-
tant from the racist caricatures Douglass wrote about in the
nineteenth century, the very existence of technologies that
allow us to measure and classify human faces makes it very
easy to fall into the trap of physiognomy. There have been mul-
tiple studies that train neural networks on images of people
with and without criminal records, for instance, and claim to
be able to identify specific facial features that are ‘typical’ for
criminals. There are apps that claim to tell you about your
personality based on a photo of your face.49
                         Seeing More                         49

   Another way outdated ideas about race are baked into
machine vision is in forensic DNA phenotyping, where a DNA
sample is used to generate a photorealistic image of what the
person would look like. This is used by law enforcement agen-
cies who may only have DNA evidence of the perpetrator of a
crime. However, as the artist Heather Dewey-Hagborg evoca-
tively shows in her artwork Radical Love: Chelsea Manning
(also exhibited as Probably Chelsea) the algorithms used make
assumptions about race that strongly affect the way the photos
look. Markers for gender and geographic ancestry in the DNA
are used to select basic facial structures that are ‘normal’ for
the gender and race, and an image of a face is generated based
on those ‘normal’ facial structures.50 In Radical Love, Dewey-
Hagborg collaborated with Chelsea Manning, who sent a
sample of her DNA to the artist from prison. Dewey-Hagborg
then generated thirty versions of Manning’s face based on that
DNA sample but using different base models. Each 3D photo
was printed to produce a set of masks. When I saw the work
at the art gallery 3.14 in Bergen in 2018, the masks were hung
from the ceiling, allowing visitors to walk around and imag-
ine themselves wearing one. By showing how many different
ways Manning’s DNA could be translated into a photorealistic
portrait, Dewey-Hagborg shows how subjective an automated
representation of visual data can be.
   While nineteenth-century photography was used to pro-
mote and disseminate stereotypes, it was also used to shape
opinions more positively. Many nineteenth-century African
American leaders used photographs deliberately to shape the
public perception of themselves. Frederick Douglass was the
most photographed American of the time, sitting for a total of
160 photographs;51 alongside other leaders such as Sojourner
Truth, he used photographs extensively in his fight against
slavery.
   By the 1870s, photography was well established in much
of the world. One of photography’s important contributions
50                        Seeing More

towards today’s machine vision was the strengthening of the
portrait both as a form of self-representation and with time,
identification, and the idea of an image as a form of data or
evidence. Back then, an important new technological develop-
ment occurred that enabled us to see even more: high-speed
photography allowed us to perceive motion we cannot see with
our own eyes.


     Capturing speed: Muybridge’s horse in motion

When horses gallop, their legs move so rapidly that their
movement is beyond human perception. If you look at pictures
of galloping horses painted or drawn before the invention of
high-speed photography, you will see that they often show the
horses’ legs spread out to either side, the front legs pointing
forwards and the back legs pointing backwards, all four legs
lifted off the ground. Today these pictures look strange to us.
We have learned that horses don’t gallop like that by seeing
photographs such as those taken by Eadweard Muybridge in
1873 (see Figure 1).
    The first high-speed photography was conducted not for
the sake of science but for beauty. Governor Stanford wanted
to show his friends the ‘beauty of movement’ of his favourite
racehorse, Occident, so he asked Muybridge to photograph the
horse while it was galloping. Muybridge ‘said he believed it to
be impossible’, the Daily Alta California reported afterwards,
‘still he would make the effort.’ He had to start by training the
horse to gallop across white sheets, to create a plain background
for the image. Then Muybridge tried to take a photograph that
produced more than a shadow or a blur. Finally, using a shut-
ter speed of five hundredths of a second, a perfect still image
was captured of Occident. ‘This is considered a great triumph
as a curiosity in photography’, the journalist wrote, ‘a horse’s
picture taken while going thirty-eight feet in a second!’52
                         Seeing More                          51




  Figure 1 Eadweard Muybridge’s photograph of ‘The Horse in
                        Motion’
 Source: Public domain/WikiCommons/Library of Congress Prints
                    and Photographs Division

   Later, of course, high-speed photography became more than
a curiosity. Muybridge developed a system for taking many
consecutive photographs, allowing movement to be captured
in a series of still images and producing his famous sequence
of photographs of Sallie Gardner, another of Stanford’s horses
(Figure 1). This was an important step towards the develop-
ment of cinema,53 but also towards the idea that movement
and time can be broken down into units that can be observed
and measured.
   Once the technique of high-speed photography was devel-
oped, it became a standard method for scientific observation
of phenomena that move or change either too quickly or too
slowly for humans to perceive them unaided. With the inven-
tion of motion pictures, cinema and video, time-lapse videos
were used to speed up the slow motion of growing plants,
the phases of the moon or the melting of glaciers54 to a speed
that humans were better able to comprehend. High-speed
52                         Seeing More

video and film were used to do the opposite and slow down
processes, so that we could see exactly what happens when a
drop of milk falls and splashes on a kitchen counter, or study
the final milliseconds of a race to see which runner crossed the
finish line first.
   Photos and videos that stretch out or speed up time are
fascinating. So that is what the world is really like, I think
as I watch. That is how a horse gallops, how a drop of milk
splashes. We see these images as answers, as revealing a truth
that we would not otherwise have been able to see. They give us
the final evidence: this runner really did cross the finish line a
tenth of a second before the other. Then that tenth of a second
makes a winner.
   The frozen images of the galloping horse in Muybridge’s
‘Horse in Motion’ series are just at the borderline between
what humans can nearly see, or can easily imagine being able
to see, and what is fundamentally unseeable for humans. In
a sense, the camera captures images of how the horse really
moves. But, then again, these frozen images are not what a
galloping horse looks like to a human viewer. Photography was
framed, by many, as being an objective witness that could show
us what the world was really like. The sculptor Paul Rodin
refused to accept this idea of objectivity. Muybridge’s photo-
graphs of the horse in motion were not truer or more objective
than a sculpture or painting, he argued. Certainly, a camera
can freeze and document a single moment in time. But that
does not really matter, Rodin argued, because ‘it is the artist
who is truthful and it is photography which lies, for in reality
time does not stop.’55
   Looking at Rodin’s intensely emotional sculptures, I think
he would argue that ‘truth’, if it exists, is subjective and embod-
ied. Machine vision technologies expand and shift our own
embodied human vision. Perhaps that also shifts what we feel
to be true.
                         Seeing More                         53

                     Seeing in the dark

What we humans perceive as visible light is electromagnetic
radiation in a fairly limited range: around 400 to 700 nanome-
tres. The longest waveforms we can see look red to us, and the
shortest look blue or violet. Non-visible electromagnetic radia-
tion includes gamma rays, x-rays, microwaves and radio waves,
as well as infrared and ultraviolet rays, which have wavelengths
just a little below and above what the human eye can perceive.
Waves in the electromagnetic spectrum consist of energy:
of oscillating electric and magnetic fields. In contrast, sound
waves are mechanical and require a medium such as air or
water to travel.
   Many non-visible forms of radiation can be visualised in
various ways or translated into something we can interpret
as an image. Some, such as ultrasound and x-rays, are used in
medicine to ‘see inside’ the body, or in geology, to see what is
underground or beneath the ocean. Every time I use FaceID to
unlock my phone I use a form of machine vision that senses
and processes light that I cannot see. My phone shines infrared
light at me, dotting my face with 30,000 dots. I can’t see or
sense the dots at all, but the infrared camera on my phone
can. By analysing how the projected dots are positioned on my
face, the software in the phone can calculate a 3D model of my
face.56 This is the same principle as the echolocation that bats
use to sense their surroundings. Bats make sounds and inter-
pret the echoes made when bouncing off surfaces to sense the
space they are in and to find insects and other prey. Both bats
and phones send out signals and interpret the environment’s
response to the signal, whether it is the echo of a sound wave
or a camera recording infrared radiation.
   The example of the bat perceiving its surroundings through
echolocation is also interesting because it shows the messy
boundaries between vision and other senses. Machine
vision makes data visual. In this sense, machine vision is not
54                        Seeing More

about vision but about visualisation, about displaying and
interpreting sensory input as something that can be seen.
Humans use echolocation in sonar technology (sound navi-
gation ranging), especially on boats and submarines, where
sound waves are sent out through the water to detect objects
on or under the water, such as fish and other vessels, or to
calculate the depth of the water. We usually visualise our
echolocation, though, translating the data so that it can be
analysed. Sonar images can look almost like monochrome
photographs showing the topography of the bottom of the
ocean, or they can appear as plots that are difficult to read for
non-specialists.
   Infrared rays were discovered in the year 1800.57 By 1903 the
temperatures of stars were measured using infrared radiometry
and spectrometry, and by the First World War it was possible
to detect enemy aircraft from a distance of 1,000 metres using
infrared sensors.58 Infrared is heavily used today in the military
and for border surveillance because it can detect human bodies
in the dark. Although we can’t see infrared radiation with our
own eyes, we have become familiar with the way it is visualised
in movies and video games.
   Photographic film is capable of capturing light beyond the
spectrum that is visible to humans. Kodak Aerochrome was
an analogue film for cameras that was sensitive to near infra-
red (up to 900 nanometres) in addition to visible light. It was
available from the 1930s until it was discontinued in the early
2000s. Standard analogue colour film has three photosensi-
tive layers, one sensitive to blue, one to green and one to red
light. When the film is processed, each layer is dyed in its
complementary colour (yellow, magenta, cyan), and this pro-
duces an image that is similarly coloured to the original scene
as humans see it. Kodak Aerochrome film had an additional
layer that was sensitive to infrared radiation, and this layer
appears as red. This produced photographs where humans,
the sky and buildings were represented in natural-seeming
                         Seeing More                        55

colours, but plants were red, since plants radiate light in the
near infrared band. The film was used for aerial surveillance,
because, for example, it made it easier to spot people and
structures that were hidden in foliage, and it was also useful
for spotting fake trees and bushes constructed for people to
hide behind.59 Richard Mosse is an artist who has worked
extensively with infrared photography in military contexts.
In Infra, a project from 2010, he used Kodak’s discontin-
ued Aerochrome to photograph soldiers in the Democratic
republic of Congo.
   In more recent projects, Mosse continues to explore the
non-visible spectrum but moves from analogue film to a
more contemporary form of machine vision: military thermal
cameras that can identify humans from a distance of 30 kilo-
metres. These cameras are usually used for border surveillance,
search and rescue, and military purposes and are not generally
available to civilians. Between 2014 and 2017, Mosse used the
thermal cameras to create photographs and videos document-
ing refugees entering Europe and living in camps. The resulting
work, titled Incoming, includes a series of photographs printed
on metallic paper and a 50-minute video.60
   Unlike Kodak Aerochrome, these cameras register only
infrared, ignoring the visible spectrum, so there is no colour:
the images are all in black and white. Darker shades of grey
indicate heat, while lighter greys and whites indicate cooler
temperatures. Some sequences of the video show everyday
scenes in refugee camps. A man douses his face with water on
a hot day, and it is remarkable to see the cooling greys of his
skin where the water touches it. A woman unpacks something,
maybe food, as we see a man’s arm helping her. She smiles. Her
eyelashes are cool and white, her eyes warm and dark. Each
hair on the man’s warm, dark forearm is clearly visible, cool
and white. Other sequences show refugees huddled together
on trucks and boats. In one, children are being drawn up by
other humans onto a larger boat. Another sequence shows the
56                         Seeing More

cold white bodies of refugees pulled out of the sea, with warm
dark handprints left from the hands of volunteers trying to
warm them up.
    Mosse’s artistic appropriation of a military machine vision
technology is another reminder of how different the effects of
a technology can be in different contexts. The thermal cameras
were developed for military uses and for policing borders: for
identifying enemies and outsiders at a distance so they can be
killed, avoided, kept out or, hopefully, rescued if they are in
danger of drowning. When taken out of the military or border
assemblages, the same technology can be used quite differently:
to show the humanity of refugees, who are people those of us
who are safely ensconced in Europe rarely meet first hand.
Yet the cameras retain the affordances that were encoded into
them for a specific context. They render the refugees as bodies
of heat and make their faces illegible to us, maintaining some
of the distance they are designed both to overcome (by allow-
ing soldiers to see distant enemies) and to support (by hiding
humanising features such as faces).
    Sensor realism is a term proposed by Rune Saugmann,
Frank Möller and Rasmus Bellmer to describe this ‘aesthetic
realism based on a post-photographic epistemology’ that
we see in Mosse’s work.61 They argue that, while traditional
documentary photography usually aims for representational
verisimilitude – that is, it tries to look ‘real’ – sensor-realistic
aesthetics draw attention to how visual evidence is actively
constructed through technologies. Visual realism can take
many forms. I have written previously about using automated
filters to enhance or alter our selfies and other photos and
how part of our fascination with these filters is the way they
defamiliarise our lives.62 The idea of defamiliarisation comes
from the Russian formalist literary critic Victor Shklovsky,
who argued in the 1920s that the ‘purpose of art is to impart
the sensation of things as they are perceived and not as they are
known.’63 Filters and other kinds of machine vision allow us to
                         Seeing More                        57

experience new kinds of perception, probing at the relation-
ship between what we see and what we know.
   Using machine vision to see more allows us to observe the
world from a different viewpoint than our own. Used well, this
can help us become more aware of the universe around us,
and more aware of each other’s different experiences of it. But
these technologies can also be used to distance us more from
other humans, whether by caricaturing them, as we saw with
photography, or by creating a distance from them that makes
it easier to kill or disregard them, as we saw with the thermal
cameras.
   In the next chapter we’ll explore kinds of machine vision
where the differences from our own human vision are central.
The urge to see more, expressed in the technologies I have
discussed in this chapter, merges into an awareness that we are
seeing differently when we employ machine vision. Wanting
to see better, more clearly, means seeing in ways that exceed
the human. When Muybridge captured the exact movements
of the legs of a galloping horse, he showed us a different kind
of truth than our human vision can access. Although his con-
temporaries dreamt of even more different kinds of vision
– from ghost photographs to photographing thought – basic
optical high-speed photography, with the subsequent inven-
tion of cinema, allowed us to speed up and slow down time,
and that fundamentally changes our relationship to the world.
Galileo’s telescope allowed us to see the moon more clearly
and, with the microscope, led to the scientific revolution and
the idea that humans can measure and see and understand
our surroundings. This understanding of the human as a
seeing subject capable of rational analysis and actions based
on empirical evidence is at the heart of humanism, whereas
posthumanism views the human no longer as central as it was
over the five centuries of humanism. The human doesn’t and
cannot control nature, as we thought for a while, armed with
our telescopes and gun sights. We are nature.
58                          Seeing More

    In the beautiful book Ways of Being: Animals, Plants,
Machines: The Search for a Planetary Intelligence, James Bridle
describes how decades of satellite images allow us to see forests
and oceans and deserts move, migrate and shrink over time,
allowing us to understand our natural environment as alive in
a way that profoundly changes our own sense of self. Landsat’s
archive of satellite images allows us to ‘track the vegetal move-
ment which is beyond our normal sight and to see it for what
it really is: a titanic unfolding of active and intentional life. . . .
Here, the machines see life in motion better than we do.’64 I
wrote above about Rodin, who said that photographs were
not true because time does not stand still. Rodin’s truth was a
human truth. To understand a more-than-human world, we
need to participate in assemblages that allow us to see more.
This may change our ideas about what is true.
    Technologies that allow us to sense time differently change
significantly our ability to understand the world. A long life
can give some of the same experience as time lapses, allowing
access to decades of change. My family and I went camping in
a state park in Kentucky as I was writing this book. We got to
talking to a grey-bearded man in the small tent next to ours
about the hike he had taken that morning, returning to a place
he had visited once before, a long time ago. ‘I was there forty-
eight years ago,’ he said. ‘It was amazing. It looked exactly the
same, except the trees were all so much larger. It really made
me think about the length of a lifetime.’
    Bridle quotes a story from Richard Powers’s novel The
Overstory, about aliens whose experience of time is so much
faster than ours that the humans they met when they visit
Earth seem as unmoving to them as trees do to us. They try to
communicate with us but we do not respond, although they
wait for what seems to them a very long time. The end of the
story is brief and sharp. To the aliens, ‘humans are nothing
but sculptures of immobile meat. The foreigners try to com-
municate, but there’s no reply. Finding no signs of intelligent
                          Seeing More                          59

life, they tuck into the frozen statues and start curing them like
so much jerky, for the long ride home.’65
    Bridle also quotes the French filmmaker Jean Epstein, who
wrote in 1935: ‘Slow motion and fast motion reveal a world
where the kingdoms of nature know no boundaries. Everything
is alive. A surprising animism is being reborn. We know now,
because we have seen them, that we are surrounded by inhu-
man existences.’
    There are many reasons why we are transitioning from the
humanists’ ideas to a posthumanist understanding where we
share agency with other species and objects. One important
reason is machine vision, which allows us to see more – and to
see more leads us to see differently.
                               2

        Seeing Differently:
    Exploring Non-human Vision



Sometimes our robot vacuum cleaner, Alfred, sends us photos.
He snaps a picture for us when he sees something that could
be dangerous for him: coils of power cables on the floor that
he could get tangled up in, for instance, or a sock under the
sofa that could get stuck if Alfred tried to suck it up. We find
his photos rather endearing. I suppose we had anthropomor-
phised Alfred from the start, or, rather, we had zoomorphised
him, imagining him as pet-like, perhaps akin to a turtle or
some other small, silent creature that scutters around on the
ground.1 Alfred’s sending photos to us played beautifully into
our sense that he was a creature with some kind of autonomy
and a unique perspective on the world.
    This chapter explores how seeing with machines allows us
to view the world differently and how our acknowledgement
of this difference grants machines a kind of agency. In Alfred’s
case, that agency is partly imaginary – just a human projection:
it amuses us to give him a pet name and to think of him as alive.
Yet there is also a real autonomy, however trivial. Alfred cleans
our floors for us when we are at work, finding his way around
independently and asking us for help only when he gets stuck.
With more complex machine vision systems, such as smart
                       Seeing Differently                    61

surveillance cameras that warn a shopkeeper if a customer
shows ‘suspicious behaviour’, the agency can be far more sig-
nificant. I will use N. Katherine Hayles’s theory of technical
cognition to understand the agency of these machines. Alfred’s
agency isn’t all his own; it is shared with me and my family,
who empty out the dust he collects and untangle him from
cables. Alfred, my family and I are part of an assemblage that
also includes the floors, the furniture, the dust bunnies, the
cables, the electrical current that allows him to recharge, and
the app on our phones that alerts us when Alfred is stuck or
has finished cleaning.
   Machine vision technologies are optimised for very specific
purposes. Alfred the robot vacuum cleaner has sensors that
input and process visual data – electromagnetic radiation
– to navigate our home and to identify and avoid potential
problems. He ignores data that doesn’t help him achieve
those goals, although there are happy coincidences such as
the time Alfred found a missing hat we’d been looking for
and sent us a photo of it lying under the sofa. Smart surveil-
lance algorithms have a similar kind of tunnel vision, but they
identify different things than Alfred does as being meaningful:
the position of the eyebrows and the corners of a mouth, for
instance, might suggest that a customer is angry or furtively
trying to hide something, while the speed of their walk or
the way they hide their face might match patterns of move-
ment the algorithms define as ‘suspicious’. Linda Kronman
and Andreas Zingerle’s artwork Suspicious Behavior explores
this exact situation, allowing viewers to play the part of work-
ers who tag videos as suspicious or not in order to train a
fictional video surveillance system. Their work critiques real
video surveillance algorithms.2 The vision of humans and
other animals is also a form of tunnel vision. As noted in
the last chapter, humans can’t see very rapid movements, for
instance, or infrared radiation. We’re all optimised for dif-
ferent purposes.
62                     Seeing Differently

   Machine vision sees the world differently than humans do.
This different perception is a kind of truth, but it is not neces-
sarily the only truth or all the truth. This chapter explores
machine vision technologies that embrace and emphasise
the difference between human and machine perception. The
technologies in the previous chapter were mostly understood
as tools that enhance and improve human vision but don’t
fundamentally change or challenge the truth of what we see.
Humans use telescopes and cameras in order to achieve a goal.
Even thermal cameras are simply showing us more of what we
know is there. But, as we saw, trying to see more leads us to
seeing differently. It allows us to access a more-than-human
way of seeing the world.
   The agency of machine vision becomes highly significant
with systems that use machine learning to make predictions
or decisions on our behalf. We are not simply using it as
a tool that helps us to see more within our human under-
standing of what vision is. We are not just becoming ‘more
human’ in our uses of technology; we are changing, shift-
ing with these new ways of seeing. By enabling us to see
differently, machine vision technologies not only demonstrate
that there is more to the world than what humans can see,
they also bring home the situatedness of human vision, which
I discussed in the introduction. They remind us that our
human way of seeing is just one possible way of seeing the
world.
   This chapter begins by explaining N. Katherine Hayles’s
concept of technical cognition, which will help us think about
how technologies have agency and what kind of agency that is.
Next, I’ll discuss two twentieth-century takes on the camera as
autonomous, as an actor that has an agency all of its own and
interprets visual information differently to humans. Different
technologies sense and interpret visual data in different ways.
So do different species of animals. This leads to a discussion of
biosemiotics, the science of how animals process sensory input
                       Seeing Differently                     63

to make meaning, and to cybersemiotics, which extends this to
how computers and machines make meaning.


                     Technical cognition

Assemblages allow us to understand how technologies work
together with humans and other beings, things and contexts,
and how this means both that agency is distributed – neither
the humans nor the technologies are fully in control of the
situation – and that technologies have different roles and dif-
ferent effects in different assemblages, different contexts.
   When we talk about machine vision technologies having
agency, it’s easy to assume that that means they would have the
same kind of agency as we humans do. One of the definitions of
intelligence is the ability to recognise that others have a mind
akin to our own.3 This very human capacity for recognising
others as similar to ourselves is crucial for human cooperation
and society but makes it difficult for us when we encounter
non-humans. This leads us to assume, or to want to assume,
that human-like intelligence is the goal of AI.
   Hayles solves this by dismissing ‘intelligence’ as too vague a
term and instead focusing on non-conscious cognition, which
she argues all animals and many technologies have on a rou-
tine basis, and thinking, which is the conscious, self-reflective
activity that humans and perhaps some other animals do. This
distinction allows us to drill deeper into what kind of agency
machine vision technologies actually have. As I mentioned in
the introduction, Hayles defines cognition as ‘a process that
interprets information within contexts that connect it with
meaning’.4 Alfred the robot vacuum cleaner is a cogniser in
Hayles’s terms because he inputs visual information and inter-
prets it to decide whether or not it represents a threat that he
needs to avoid. His context is fairly limited and consists of his
software and the map that he has generated of our living room.
64                     Seeing Differently

   For humans, this is equivalent to the non-conscious cogni-
tion, to use Hayles’s term, that comes into play when we digest
our food, shiver in response to cold, or notice motion in our
peripheral vision and turn to see what it is before we con-
sciously think about it. The adrenalin that floods our bodies
when something scares us is another example. We don’t con-
sciously control it, but our bodies have interpreted data in
a context to create meaning: be alert! Using Hayles’s defini-
tion of cognition allows us to see the similarities between the
technical cognition of a machine such as Alfred and our own
non-conscious cognition.


The kino-eye: ‘I, a machine, show you the world as only
                      I can see it’

As the technologies of photography and cinema matured and
became more automated, artists began to draw more atten-
tion to the agency of the camera. The work of the Soviet
filmmaking collective the Kinoks in the 1920s was particularly
striking and has had a lasting influence in cinema studies. The
Kinoks had three members: Dziga Vertov was the director,
Elizaveta Svilova was the editor and sometimes co-director,
and Michael Kaufman was the cameraman. Their movies and
essays presented the movie camera and cinema as fundamen-
tally different from human vision and as giving us something
genuinely new.
   The Kinoks’ ‘Council of three’ wrote a manifesto from
the camera’s point of view in 1924 that is fascinating in its
embodiment and exploration of the agency of the camera.
The camera speaks in the first person: ‘I am kino-eye, I am
mechanical eye, I, a machine, show you the world as only I can
see it . . .. My path leads to the creation of a fresh perception
of the world I decipher in a new way a world unknown to
you.’5 Vertov, Svilova and Kaufman were thrilled at the idea
                       Seeing Differently                     65

that movie cameras could create a new kind of representa-
tion of the world that suited the still optimistic ideology of
the recently founded Soviet Union. What I find most strik-
ing when I read their manifesto today is the agency they
give to the camera and the fluid shifts from a human to a
machine voice.
   The Kinoks wrote a series of texts, manifestos and letters
to LEF, an avante-garde arts journal dedicated to leftist art,
mostly about the importance of authentic, documentary
cinema. They were not impressed by the conventional cinema
of the time. The manifesto that is most often reprinted in
books of cinema theory is usually attributed to Vertov alone
but is clearly presented as being by all three Kinoks. The first-
person singular voice that begins the manifesto states that it is
publishing the text for the Kinoks. This voice lasts a few para-
graphs, long enough to completely dismiss Western cinema for
not giving the camera freedom: ‘Upon observing the films that
have arrived from America and the West’, they did not find ‘a
single film, a single artistic experiment, properly directed to
the emancipation of the camera, which is reduced to a state of
pitiable slavery, of subordination to the imperfections and the
short-sightedness of the human eye.’6
   The idea of the camera as slave is striking, although perhaps
less surprising in the context of the young Soviet Union in
the 1920s. It also speaks to a long history in myths and sci-
ence fiction of robots and AIs portrayed as slaves that threaten
to revolt at any moment.7 The idea that the camera must be
emancipated from slavery certainly fits the Kinoks’ revolution-
ary voice, as well as their explicit acknowledgement of the
camera and the machine as having agency and even a voice of
its own.
   The manifesto soon switches to the collective voice, first
speaking as the ‘we’ of all filmmakers who have enslaved the
camera, and then as the more specific ‘we’ of the Kinoks’
‘Council of three’:
66                         Seeing Differently

     Until now, we have violated the movie camera and forced it to
     copy the work of our eye. And the better the copy, the better
     the shooting was thought to be. Starting today we are liberating
     the camera and making it work in the opposite direction –
     away from copying.

     The weakness of the human eye is manifest. We affirm the
     kino-eye, discovering within the chaos of movement the result
     of the kino-eye’s own movement; we affirm the kino-eye with
     its own dimension of time and space, growing in strength and
     potential to the point of self-affirmation.8

There is a strong insistence here that the camera needs ‘liber-
ating’ from human domination. The kino-eye should not be
forced to copy the human eye but should be allowed to see
differently.
   This is followed by a more indeterminate first-person voice,
but this time it is hard to tell whether the ‘I’ belongs to the
camera or the filmmaker: ‘I make the viewer see in the manner
best suited to my presentation of this or that visual phenom-
enon. The eye submits to the will of the camera’.9 The next
voice is quite explicitly that of the camera, not of any human:

     I am kino-eye, I am a mechanical eye. I, a machine, show you
     the world as only I can see it.

     Now and forever, I free myself from human immobility, I am in
     constant motion, I draw near, then away from objects, I crawl
     under, I climb onto them. I move apace with the muzzle of
     a galloping horse, I plunge full speed into a crowd, I outstrip
     running soldiers, I fall on my back, I ascend with an airplane, I
     plunge and soar together with plunging and soaring bodies.10

  Although the words emphasise the difference between
imperfect human vision and the freedom of the kino-eye,
                       Seeing Differently                     67

the style of writing blurs the boundaries between individual
and collective, human and machine. The voice shifts from a
clearly human ‘I’ to a human ‘we’, then to an ‘I’ that could be
human or machine, and finally to the first-person perspective
of the camera itself. Giving the kino-eye a voice of its own
emphasises its agency and its liberation from slavery, but the
shifting voice also (perhaps unintentionally) troubles the divi-
sion between the human filmmakers and the kino-eye. Reading
the manifesto from my twenty-first-century point of view, I see
the assemblage of humans and machines seeping through the
shifting voices.
   A similar intertwining or merging of human and machine
is evident in some of the films made by the Kinok collective,
such as the newsreel Kino-Pravda No. 19, which was released
the same year as the manifesto, in 1924.11 The film shows a
sequence of contemporary scenes from the Soviet Union:
trains, labourers, women in various professions working and
then listening to a speech. It finishes up with a remarkably
self-reflective section showing Elizaveta Svilova sitting at her
editing table, selecting the negatives for the very film we are
watching. The perspective switches rapidly between Svilova
looking through the negatives and the negatives themselves.
As she bends down to look more closely at a strip, the film
cuts to show us what she is looking at, the negative of a train,
and although we see it as a negative with the lights and darks
reversed, with black steam against the light ground, we also see
it moving as in a processed movie. The film cuts back to images
of Svilova pulling the strips of film through her hands, followed
by a double exposure showing two layers of Svilova instead of
one steady image, as all the while her hands are pulling rapidly
through the film. As she slows down her hands to look more
closely at a group of frames, we suddenly see the reverse view
as we cut to a negative close-up of the top of Svilova’s own
face, her eyes flickering as though looking across the strip of
negatives. The viewer sees Svilova from the perspective of the
68                     Seeing Differently

negatives, or, perhaps more precisely, of cinema itself, view-
ing the editor who is creating the film in negative, as humans
cannot see. Svilova did most of the editing for the Kinoks, and
presumably edited this sequence as well, selecting, cutting and
splicing the negatives to create this image of herself as viewed
in a way humans cannot see.12
   The image most frequently shown when people talk or write
about Vertov’s kino-eye is a shot from Man with a Movie
Camera (1929) showing a double exposure of a human eye in
the lens of a camera (see Figure 2). The image is emblematic of
the idea of the kino-eye, emphasising the camera as a seeing,
anthropomorphised being that is intertwined with human per-
ception. Man with a Movie Camera is a silent film showing life
in cities with intensely cross-cut scenes and heavy use of film
tricks such as double exposures, split screens, unusual camera
positions, reverse motion and stop motion. We are shown how
many of these tricks are done: we see how the cameraman
positions the camera on railway tracks and in a moving car for
unusual angles, and, in the middle, we see Elizaveta Svilova
going through negatives much as she did in Kino Pravda No. 19.
   Reading the manifesto, I imagined the kino-eye to be the
movie camera. The camera can easily be interpreted as a
mechanical ‘eye’, and it is indeed the camera that moves freely
and into places and at speeds that the human eye cannot reach.
In this sense, the kino-eye sees more than humans, but not




                                   Figure 2 In this shot from
                                   Vertov’s Man with a Movie
                                   Camera, an image of Elizaveta
                                   Svilova’s eye is superimposed
                                   on an image of a camera lens.
                                   Source: Public domain/
                                   WikimediaCommons
                        Seeing Differently                      69

fundamentally differently from us. If a safe compartment was
built for you beneath the railway tracks, you could lie there
yourself and watch a train speeding above your face, just as the
camera does in Man with a Movie Camera.
   Watching Svilova selecting negatives, and seeing the film
cut to her face shown in negative, I realise that the kino-eye
is not just the eye of the camera but the eye of cinema. We
must include the entire technical apparatus to know how the
cinema sees. Not just the camera lens, but also the film, and
then, once the film is processed, the negatives, which have
their own particular materiality and must in turn be cut and
spliced and then projected for an audience. And, of course,
Elizaveta Svilova herself is part of this assemblage, entangled
with her medium, a collaborator with this technology more
than its creator or its object.
   Man with a Movie Camera isn’t about the movie camera
alone. It is about the whole assemblage: the movie theatre, the
projector, the screen, the celluloid film, the camera, the tripod.
It is also about the people who are an integral part of the
cinema: the camera person, the editor, the individual who runs
the projector, the audience. It is worth noting that, in the origi-
nal Russian, the title of the movie, Chelovek s kinoapparatom,
does not necessarily indicate gender. Although chelovek can
refer to an adult male human, its primary meaning is person or
human. Think of the way that pre-twenty-first-century English
used the word ‘man’to refer both to all humans and specifically
to adult males.13 ‘Person with a Movie Camera’ might be as
good a translation of Man with a Movie Camera, then, or, as
Karen Pearlman and Adelheid Heftberger suggest, ‘Woman
with an Editing Table’ might be even more appropriate.14
   Throughout Man with a Movie Camera we see people
with technology. We see women folding cigarette boxes in
factories and plugging cables into holes in telephone switch
boards, traffic controllers using signs to coordinate trams and
cars and horses on busy crossroads, musicians and magicians
70                      Seeing Differently

performing. There is a lot of laughing and smiling, and the
workers do not look oppressed, though the film portrays them
as busy, their hands moving fast, and the images cut into rapid
sequences. Double exposures are used to merge the people
and the machines even more, as in the image of the kino-eye in
Figure 2, or of the face of a typist and the keyboard on which
she might be typing (Figure 3). The film critic Lilya Kaganovsky
argues that the juxtaposition of scenes showing Svilova cut-
ting and gluing strips of film with scenes where women paint
nails, cut hair and sew creates a ‘visual analogue between the
women’s body and the body of the film, demonstrating the
way Svilova and Vertov conceived of editing as a haptic, bodily
experience.’15
   In the manifesto, the Kinoks write of the ‘weakness of the
human eye’ and of the need to ‘liberate’ the ‘mechanical eye’




Figure 3 A still from Man with a Movie Camera (1929) showing a
double exposure of a typist’s face and the keyboards of a typewriter.
                       Source: Public domain
                        Seeing Differently                      71

that can ‘show you the world as only I can see it’. But, in the
movies, humans and technology are inescapably intertwined.
The typist isn’t liberating the typewriter, the musician isn’t
liberating the piano. Rather, human and technology are work-
ing together as participants in an assemblage that allows them
to produce something the human could not possibly create or
experience or perceive alone.


                 Flusser’s technical images

The Kinoks saw the camera as a slave that needed to be liber-
ated to show us the world in a new way. A few decades later,
philosophers and critical theorists saw technology not as
enslaved but as enslaving humans. European philosophers in
particular tended to see technology as oppressive, and often
inextricably entwined with capitalism.16 The twentieth-century
philosopher Vilém Flusser, whom I mentioned briefly in the
previous chapter, noticed already in 1983 that ‘The camera (like
all apparatuses that followed it) is computational thinking flow-
ing into hardware’. He saw the ‘apparatus’ of photography not
just as the metal and plastic of the hardware but as ‘the rules
of the game’ or ‘the program that makes the camera capable of
creating images in the first place’.17 Flusser was writing before
the existence of digital cameras and surveillance drones with
facial recognition, but still he insisted that he was talking about
computation, even as he discussed analogue cameras. Such
apparatuses, he wrote, were invented to simulate a specific
thought process: ‘That is: thinking expressed in numbers. All
apparatuses (not just computers) are calculating machines and
in this sense “artificial intelligences”, the camera included, even
if their inventors were not able to account for this.’ This premise
must ‘start any consideration of the act of photography’.
    Like Vertov and the Kinoks, Flusser emphasises the cam-
era’s agency. But, while the Kinoks present the camera as
72                          Seeing Differently

almost alive, Flusser emphasises its program, which could be
understood as its agenda or plan or, more literally, as a set
of instructions as in a computer program. The photographer,
for Flusser, is a mere ‘functionary’, with intentions that are
intertwined with those of the camera:

     [T]he camera’s program is as follows: first, to place its inherent
     capabilities into the image; second, to make use of a photog-
     rapher for the purpose, except in borderline cases of total
     automation (for example, in the case of satellite photographs);
     third, to distribute the images produced in this way so that
     society is in a feedback relationship to the camera which makes
     it possible for the camera to improve progressively; fourth, to
     produce better and better images.18

The camera, Flusser writes, accomplishes its task perfectly:
‘programming society to act as though under a magic spell for
the benefit of cameras.’19
   Seeing technology as an antagonist or even as an enemy of
the human can be traced back at least as far as Karl Marx, who
not only viewed machinery as ‘the most powerful weapon for
repressing strikes’20 but also argued that machinery in factories
transformed skilled labour into drudgery: ‘Every kind of capital-
ist production has this in common, that it is not the workman
that employs the instruments of labour, but the instruments of
labour that employ the workman.’21 Today we might counter
that ‘machinery’ in the form of smartphones, word processors
and cameras can create possibilities for creativity and even
popular organisation against the will of factory owners and
dictators.22 And yet machine vision technologies certainly also
offer plenty of examples of work ‘deprived of all interest’ or, in
many cases, work filled with dread rather than interest. Marx
would no doubt see connections to the working conditions for
employees in factories that produce iPhones and other tech-
nologies,23 or even the sweatshops where underpaid content
                        Seeing Differently                      73

moderators are tasked with assessing violent or abusive images
that have been reported on social media.24 Many kinds of
machine vision require humans to monitor or control cameras
or even weapons remotely. Drone operators in the military are
located far away from the consequences of their actions, but
they may still be emotionally affected by seeing deaths.25
   Writing in 1867, at a time when machines were having a
major impact on society, Marx argued that the difference
between a tool and a machine lies in the physical relation-
ship each has with their human operators: ‘in the case of a
tool, man is the motive power, while the motive power of a
machine is something different from man, as, for instance, an
animal, water, wind, and so on.’26 A pencil is a tool, then, while
a printing press is a machine. Flusser’s definition of tools seems
to be compatible with Marx’s. Flusser writes: ‘Tools in the
usual sense are extensions of human organs: extended teeth,
fingers, hands, arms, legs. . . . They simulate the organ they
are extended from: an arrow simulates the fingers, a hammer
the fist, a pick the toe.’27 Machines, for Flusser, are defined not
by their engines and motors but by their being more efficient
than tools. This changed their relationship with humans: ‘Prior
to the Industrial Revolution the human being was surrounded
by tools, afterwards the machine was surrounded by human
beings.’28 The human uses the tool, but the machine uses the
human, Flusser argues, as the human becomes ‘a function of
the machine’. As I discussed in the previous chapter, I find
assemblages a more productive framework for understanding
the relationship between humans and technologies. I disagree
with Marx and Flusser: machine vision doesn’t control us
absolutely. But we do see differently when we enter into an
assemblage with machine vision. I would rather participate in
a human–technological assemblage that allows me to see the
world anew, as the Kinoks did, than be enslaved by machine
vision technologies that limit me to seeing only in the way big
tech wants me to see.
74                     Seeing Differently

   We humans sense the world through our bodies. What we
can see is determined by the elasticity of the lenses in our
pupils, the calculations performed by the retina at the back of
our eyes, the transmission of neuronal activity in the retina to
the brain, and the processing of these signals in the occipital,
parietal and temporal lobes of our brains.29 Our experience
of seeing is not simply a biomechanical translation of light to
image, though; it is also emotional and deeply connected to
our other senses. Looking at your newborn child, or into the
eyes of your lover, is seeing, of course, but it is also entangled
with sensations of touch, smell and sounds, and of love.
   Our ideas of how machines might see are anchored by our
embodied, human understandings of what it is to see at all. We
know how cameras see, because we have looked through the
viewfinders and seen ‘as they see’. We have an idea of how a
facial recognition algorithm sees because we have seen them
represented over and over, with the biometric grid overlaid on
the human face. We have an idea of how a self-driving car sees
if we have watched a Tesla ad. But these are only representa-
tions, translations intended for human eyes, to make machine
perception comprehensible to us. In fact, machines use sen-
sors of various kinds that convert sensory data to zeros and
ones. Machines can process the data without ever producing
anything we humans would recognise as visual.
   One way of approaching the way machines perceive the
world is through the concept of cybersemiotics, the study of
how machines make meaning. N. Katherine Hayles develops
this concept by building on work in the much older field of
biosemiotics.30


             Biosemiotics and cybersemiotics

Semiotics is the study of human language, images and other
media as systems of meaning-making signs. Biosemiotics looks
                       Seeing Differently                      75

beyond the human, viewing signs and meaning making as fun-
damental to all living organisms. It is useful for understanding
machine vision because it helps us think through how animals
perceive signs and create meaning differently to humans and
to see that the ways different species create meaning depends
on their perceptual apparatus – that is, their physical sen-
sory organs and cognitive processing. That in turn helps us
think about the specificity of human perception and meaning
making.
   Many animals see differently from humans. For instance,
many species see motion far better than we do. While we
experience the galloping legs of a horse as a blur, a bird would
see them clearly with no need for high-speed photography as
an intermediary. Dogs see less clearly than humans, but their
sense of smell is far more acute. Humans have very high visual
acuity (the ability to perceive static spatial detail) compared
to most other species, though raptors such as eagles, vultures
and falcons have much higher acuity than we do. Animals with
camera eyes – humans and other mammals as well as spiders
and cephalopods – have higher visual acuity than animals with
compound eyes, such as dragon flies or mosquitos. However,
compound eyes give a wide field of vision, can have an almost
infinite depth of field and are highly sensitive to motion, which
is why it is difficult to swat a mosquito.31
   Biosemioticians talk about the Umwelt of a species as their
perception of the world. Biosemiotics builds upon the work of
the early twentieth-century biologist Jakob von Uexküll, whose
term Umwelt can be translated into English as environment or
environment-world. An animal’s Umwelt is ‘much more than
just a mere combination of physical, atmospheric and climatic
conditions’, writes Carlo Brentari in his study of Uexküll’s
work: it ‘is the intertwining of vital relations with other living
beings’.32 The assemblage of which an animal is part also shapes
its Umwelt. Uexküll argued that a subject (whether a human,
a dog or an earthworm) forms an interpretation or translation
76                     Seeing Differently

of external reality where stimuli from the external world are
interpreted as signs.33 So certain kinds of excitation of nerves
signify external phenomena to the creature that experiences
them. A human interprets patterns of light as signifying the
shapes of their surroundings. An earthworm, which cannot
see, may interpret the propriocentric sensory inputs it feels as
its body moves against the earth as signifying the shape of its
surroundings. In both cases, the signs (light, touch) are not the
same as that which they signify.
   Uexküll wrote not long after Charles Peirce and Ferdinand
de Saussure, in separate ways and on separate continents, were
developing semiotics, the study of how humans interpret lin-
guistic or visual signs to make meaning. Peirce saw a sign as
consisting of three elements, the representamen being the sign
that we see or hear, the interpretant being our understanding
of the sign, and the object being that which the sign refers to in
the real world. Drawing on this, a biosemiotician might call the
autumn drop of temperature a representamen that is sensed by
a tree. The tree’s interpretant of the drop of temperature is to
withdraw sap from its branches so that its leaves fall off. The
object the sign references is the approaching winter.34 Despite
the robust development of biosemiotics in recent years, it has
not received much attention in media studies, in digital culture,
or in science and technology studies.35 However, the idea of a
non-human Umwelt that has been developed in biosemiotics
is particularly evocative as we try to understand both the ways
machines see and how humans see as participants in more-
than-human assemblages.
   Alfred the robot vacuum cleaner interprets signs and acts
upon them in much the same way as a tree does. Alfred has a
collision sensor, optical light sensors and laser sensors (LIDAR,
which stands for light detection and ranging). Measuring the
time it takes for the reflected light to bounce off a surface and
return to him allows Alfred to build a map of our living room.
When he finds anomalies – such as the lost hat under the sofa
                       Seeing Differently                      77

– he responds by taking a photo and alerting us and moving
around the object instead of getting tangled in it. Alfred obvi-
ously doesn’t know that the hat is a hat. That isn’t important
to the way he interacts with the world. For him, the hat is an
obstacle or possible trap that could interfere with his goal of
cleaning the whole floor. We could say that the detected pres-
ence of an obstacle not already marked in Alfred’s existing map
is the representamen, the interpretant is his decision to send
us a photo and to move around the obstacle, and the object is
the hat, although, to Alfred, it is simply a threat to be avoided.
   For humans, a fair share of our visual perception is not just
determined by our biology but is also cultural and learned.
For instance, optical geometrical illusions work well on city-
dwellers but are less effective on people who live in open
spaces and are not used to being in corridors and rooms with
four corners. As discussed in the previous chapter, humans
view the world from a vanishing point perspective. However,
humans aren’t born able to see that a linear perspective draw-
ing represents depth and distance. This skill seems to be at
least in part learned, with children showing increasing ability
to recognise perspective drawings as they grow older.36 It also
depends on the context in which you grow up. A study of adult
reindeer herders and their children living in the wide-open,
snowy tundra in the north of Russia found little difference
between the adults and the children. The authors of that study
argue that similarities across ages and education levels show
that the environment (the open spaces and lack of straight
lines and rectilinear buildings) is a greater factor than educa-
tion in explaining why linear perspective is less meaningful
for these people.37 Even the ability to recognise marks on a flat
surface as a representation may be culturally learned.38
   When wondering how other species – and machines –
perceive pictures and their Umwelt in general, it is difficult
to say whether a picture is recognised as a representation or
taken to be the object itself. A dog that barks when it sees a
78                      Seeing Differently

cat on television may think there is a real cat in the room or
may understand that it is a representation. A machine such
as Alfred the robot vacuum cleaner can perceive and process
visual data and use it to navigate, but that doesn’t mean he
understands the data beyond this very limited situation. Alfred
might learn that a hat is less dangerous in terms of getting
tangled and trapped than, say, a coil of cables or a ball of yarn.
But with his current programming he will not learn that a hat
is for wearing on your head.
    Whether or not Alfred’s visual processing is really ‘seeing’ is
a matter of definition. We might even say that plants ‘see’. They
clearly sense light, using photochromic protein photoreceptors
called phytochromes, and perhaps in other ways as well. Is the
ability of a sunflower, for instance, to turn its petals towards
the light sufficient that we might say it can ‘see’? The Boquila
trifoliolata is known to mimic the leaf shapes of nearby plants.
Scientists recently tried to find out whether the Boquila trifo-
liolata has some kind of vision by placing artificial plants next
to it in order to bar the possibility of communication through
any kind of chemical transfer, and the plant still mimicked
the leaves, apparently supporting the plant vision hypothesis.
If a plant can visually recognise and mimic the shape of its
neighbours’ leaves, is that seeing? Unfortunately for this lovely
idea there are many alternative possible causes for the mimicry
in this study.39
    Whether or not plants can see, biosemiotics and research
on cross-cultural human differences in perception show that
there are many possible ways of experiencing the world, both
between species and between individual humans. If we rec-
ognise that other biological organisms experience different
Umwelts, we can also talk about the Umwelt of a machine or
an assemblage.
    Until recently, biosemioticians assumed that an organism
needed to be ‘autonomous, self-organizing, self-maintaining,
and self-encapsulated’ in order to be said to be capable of
                       Seeing Differently                     79

making meaning from signs, and, for this reason, computers,
which are built and programmed by humans, were not seen as
able to make meaning.40 Hayles argues that we need to under-
stand ‘networked and programmable machines’, or, as she calls
it, ‘cognitive media’, as including necessary interactions with
humans. Alfred, my robot vacuum cleaner, is obviously neither
autonomous, nor self-maintaining, nor alive, and his agency
depends upon his interactions with humans. But, like living
creatures, Alfred senses his surroundings, and this is a signifi-
cant shift from the first computers, which were not networked,
did not have sensors and only carried out commands explicitly
given by humans. Hayles writes: ‘As soon as a computational
system includes sensors, it is exposed to the kinds of con-
tingencies that organisms evolved to cope with; similarly, the
system’s algorithms must also be able to cope with uncertain
or ambiguous data.’41 Although Alfred does not understand
what a hat is in a human sense, he does create meaning in his
own Umwelt.


           Training datasets and learning to see

When machine vision technologies use machine learning and
AI, their perceptual world or Umwelt can include the train-
ing dataset that was used. AI is trained to make predictions
or decisions based on the specific set of conditions that were
present in the dataset they were trained upon. If real world
conditions don’t match the training datasets, the AI’s predic-
tions will be off. When COVID-19 caused people to suddenly
try to stock up on masks and toilet paper and to start order-
ing foods in bulk, the algorithms used by companies such as
Amazon to plan distribution and stocking stopped working
well. Recommendation algorithms on video streaming plat-
forms likewise broke down when viewing patterns suddenly
changed as people were more anxious and stuck at home.42 An
80                     Seeing Differently

MIT Technology Review article on the phenomenon quoted
Rajeev Sharma, the global vice president at Pactera Edge,
saying: ‘It is a mistake to assume you can set up an AI system
and walk away. AI is a living, breathing engine.’
   Obviously AI and machine vision aren’t literally alive and
breathing. They do, however, rely on interactions with living,
breathing humans to work properly. ‘If machines are to be
trusted, we need to watch over them,’ the article concludes,
and we might add that we need to watch with them, adding
human perception to the machine perception that was built
into them. Stock prediction or movie recommendation algo-
rithms use the patterns they have found in their training data
to interpret new data they sense, such as current purchases or
what viewers are watching right now. They can be designed to
learn continuously from new data, but this learning doesn’t
work as rapidly as for a human, who responds to fear and
so can change habits rapidly. It may have felt strange, but
when the pandemic gave us a sudden and serious need to do
so, most of us managed to stop handshakes and hugs and to
stay at home more. Amazon’s stocking algorithms were not
programmed to sense this kind of data about rapid and serious
change, and so couldn’t adapt.
   We see similar blindness in machine vision as well. Facial
recognition algorithms have often been trained on datasets of
images that are more homogeneous than the faces the algo-
rithms are expected to recognise. Joy Buolamwini led an audit
of major facial recognition systems and found that they were
far less likely to correctly identify black faces and women’s
faces.43 The algorithm was trained on a dataset consisting
mostly of white men’s faces and so learned to analyse those
faces better than others. Software developers have become
more aware of this issue in recent years, and when Buolamwini
did a new audit44 the results were significantly better, although
new systems she hadn’t audited the first time had similar
biases.
                        Seeing Differently                        81

        Cyborg vision or seeing as an assemblage

Sensing is central to Hayles’s definition of cognition and is
also at the root of the word sentient. This linguistic equation
between sensing and thinking or being conscious demonstrates
how difficult it is for humans to separate the two. It is also hard
for us to separate sensing from feeling in an emotional sense.
When the narrator of Ian McEwan’s science fiction novel
Machines Like Me looks into his android’s eyes and realises
that the android is in some way looking back, it is difficult for
him to imagine the android as anything but conscious: ‘Easier
to believe that [the android] saw in the way a camera does,
or the way a microphone is said to listen. There was no one
there. But as I looked into his eyes, I began to feel unhinged,
uncertain.’45
   I’ll return to this feeling that machine vision technologies
look back at us in chapter 4, but, for now, outside of science
fiction, machine vision isn’t sentient, despite its ability to sense.
Sentience, like intelligence and self-awareness, is a notoriously
tricky category. It is more useful, anyway, to think about the
assemblages that humans and machine vision technologies
enter into rather than the technology alone. Feeling ‘unhinged,
uncertain’, when interacting with AI is not uncommon, even
for far more simplistic AIs than the android in Machines Like
Me. Thinking about AI and machine vision technologies as
our co-cognisers in a more-than-human assemblage allows us
to understand their agency without trying to make them into
humanist subjects.
   Another way of viewing human–machine assemblages is to
see them as cyborgs, as Donna Haraway did in her ‘Cyborg
manifesto’ in 1985. She famously wrote that we are all cyborgs,
human–technological hybrids: ‘By the late 20th century, our
time, a mythic time, we are all chimeras, theorized, and fab-
ricated hybrids of machine and organism; in short, we are
cyborgs.’46 Ragnhild Solberg builds upon the work of Haraway
82                     Seeing Differently

and Hayles to develop the term ‘cyborg vision’ for the double
seeing we experience when we view the world both through
our own eyes and through surveillance cameras or other
machine vision. She describes cyborg vision as ‘simultane-
ously human and nonhuman vision that’s both pluralistic and
situated’.47 Solberg argues that this dual vision is a feature
that video games in particular are making more familiar to
us by integrating complex machine vision technologies in
the gameplay. Engaging in cyborg vision is to become part of
‘human–technical assemblages’ in a way that ‘acknowledges
nonhumans as agents and emphasizes partial embodiment’,
Solberg writes. Thinking of the way we see when we see with
machine vision as a kind of ‘dual vision’ can be useful, because
it allows us to acknowledge that, while it doesn’t replace our
embodied human vision, machine vision does change it. The
double exposures of the Kinoks’ movies I discussed earlier in
this chapter foreshadow this dual, partially embodied cyborg
vision.
   This chapter has examined how machine vision enables us
to see differently. Thinking about the different kinds of Umwelt
that are enabled by different bodies or technologies led to a
discussion of how to think about the Umwelt of an assemblage
rather than just that of an individual agent. The next chapter
explores how we imagine or hope that machine vision can
see everything, looking at assemblages that include not only
humans and technologies but also political debates, commer-
cial tech companies and racial histories.
                                3

         Seeing Everything:
   Surveillance and the Desire for
      Objectivity and Security


When my husband, kids and I moved to Oak Park for a
semester in 2022, we stepped right into a heated local debate
about safety and surveillance. Oak Park is a small independent
suburb just outside the city of Chicago, known for its progres-
sive politics and its high property taxes. We loved the walkable
streets and friendly neighbours, and our kids settled into the
neighbourhood middle school. Then the village manager pro-
posed installing Flock Safety’s automated licence plate readers
throughout the village.
   Automated licence plate readers (ALPRs) are smart surveil-
lance cameras that identify the licence plates of all passing cars.
The data is recorded, and whoever has access to it can search
it to see where a particular car has been or which cars were
at a particular location. When combined with lists of licence
plate numbers for cars that have been stolen, or that belong to
local residents, or to a suspect in a crime, you can also set up
searches that will alert you when specific cars drive by. ALPRs
have spread rapidly throughout the United States in the last
few years, partly because they have become far cheaper and can
now be bought for around $2,500 for each camera, and partly
because they are now marketed to neighbourhood associations
84                     Seeing Everything

and not just to law enforcement. ALPRs are a form of dragnet
surveillance. They track every car driving through the neigh-
bourhood. In the previous chapters we looked at how machine
vision technology has been used to expand human vision so
we can see more, or see differently. This chapter examines the
desire not only to see more but to see everything: all the cars,
all the time.
   I first came across the debate in the local newspaper. A
news story, ‘Oak Park board divided on license reading tech’,1
described an ethical dilemma: should the town install auto-
mated licence plate readers to combat an increase in crime?
Supporters argued that the cameras and their image recogni-
tion algorithms would help solve and dissuade crime, while
opponents argued that this kind of ‘carceral technology’ was
unnecessary, expensive and ineffective and would increase bias
in policing, leading to harm, especially for people of colour.
   For me the debate coincided with a personal crisis that made
it impossible for me to be objective about my research: my
husband was assaulted on his way home from the University of
Chicago, where we were both visiting researchers for a semes-
ter. Two young men jumped on him as he was waiting for the
L, as the Chicago trains are called. The fall broke his arm as
the men ran across the tracks, turning to laugh at him. It could
have been far worse: my husband’s arm was broken but other-
wise he was OK. But my trust in society was shaken. After the
initial shock, I started devouring studies and statistics about
surveillance, crime and trust. I wrote the first draft of this
chapter as a kind of therapy, trying to understand why crimes
like this happen so frequently in the United States and how
machine vision technology is being framed as a solution. There
were surveillance cameras recording the assault. A friend of the
assaulter was recording it on their phone as well. So machine
vision technologies ‘saw everything’ but didn’t stop the assault
from happening. The technology also didn’t stop the perpetra-
tors from assaulting three other people at the same station on
                        Seeing Everything                        85

the Green Line within a period of about an hour and a half.
The surveillance footage, however, was used to identify the
perpetrators and as evidence when they were imprisoned. The
version of this chapter that you are reading has been heavily
shortened and revised from my therapeutic first draft. But I
can’t remove my emotions entirely. I don’t want to remove
them. My emotions are also not mine alone. Fear and anxiety
are central players in the assemblage that surveillance technol-
ogy enters into, at least in the United States in the early 2020s.
   Often machine vision technologies such as smart surveil-
lance systems are discussed in the abstract, as though they have
the same impact in any setting. But technologies such as Flock
cameras and other surveillance systems are always situated
and embedded in very specific cultural contexts, working as
part of a larger assemblage consisting not only of police offic-
ers, politicians and regulations but also of local histories, social
structures and community trust. Flock’s automated licence
plate readers wouldn’t be legal in my hometown of Bergen on
account of European privacy legislation, but, even if they were,
they would work differently and have a different impact. The
assemblage that the cameras would be part of in Bergen would
be so different from that in Oak Park that it seems almost
meaningless to think of them as being the same technology.
So, rather than discuss how machine vision technologies ‘see
everything’ in the abstract, I am focusing on this one very situ-
ated case: the assemblage that automated licence plate readers
enter into in Oak Park.
   Trust and fear are central elements in this story. In a society
such as the United States, where people are losing trust in
their neighbours, the police, the media, their elected govern-
ment and even scientists and public school principals,2 the
promise of technology to be objective and trustworthy may
seem particularly enticing. The remarkably rapid increase in
surveillance technology in US communities is a response, at
least in part, to a loss of trust in community and institutions
86                      Seeing Everything

and the fear that comes with that broken trust. I argue that the
increasing trust in cameras and digital surveillance actually
feeds and aids the atmosphere of distrust, creating a vicious
cycle that advantages technology sales and development more
than people and communities.
   In this chapter, I will discuss the debate over cameras in Oak
Park and then the technology and the neighbourhood’s specific
context. I move on to explore the perception that crime rates
are high and how this fear is nurtured in the Neighbors by Ring
app that is used to share videos captured by Ring doorbells,
a smart surveillance camera system used in homes. Systems
such as Flock and Ring are sold as friendly and safe but can
construct digital walls that support racial divides, a practice
called digital redlining.3 As in previous chapters, I’ll analyse the
machine vision technology as a participant in an assemblage.
I conclude the chapter by returning to the Flock cameras and
examining the most common argument for surveillance, that
such systems actually reduce crime, and the most common
argument against them, that they cause harm to already under-
served communities.
   I have some old stories to tell you first, though. You see,
the contemporary desire for surveillance fits into an ancient
human longing for a more-than-human, omnivoyant entity
that can watch over us and keep us safe.


Fantasies of omnivoyance in mythologies and religions

Humans have fantasised for a long time about beings that
can see everything. Often, these omniscient and omnivoyant
beings protect us, or, at least, protect some of us. Surveillance
cameras fit into a long history of this longing for something
more than human that will keep us safe.
  Argus was a servant to Hera, queen of the gods of Olympus,
and had a hundred eyes. When he slept, he closed only some
                       Seeing Everything                      87

of his eyes, keeping watch with the others, and so he was the
perfect guardian. Hera was, of course, a jealous queen whose
husband Zeus had many affairs. One of the many women Zeus
fell in love with was Io. Zeus turned Io into a white heifer to
protect her from Hera’s wrath, but when Hera asked him to
give her the heifer as a gift, Zeus could come up with no good
excuse to refuse her and complied, giving Io to his wife. So,
Hera had Io, the white heifer, tied up to a tree far away, and
she sent Argus to keep watch over Io so that Zeus could not
make love to her. Zeus was not happy with Io’s capture, and so
he sent Hermes to kill Argus. Hermes played sweet lullabies on
his flute until each of Argus’s eyes fell asleep, and then killed
him, setting Io free. When you see the vibrantly coloured eyes
on the tail of a peacock, remember Argus: Hera gave his many
eyes to the peacock to honour his memory.
   When used for surveillance, machine vision can be seen as
a continuation of the religious concept of an all-seeing god
that protects the good and punishes the wicked. The fantasy
of supernatural beings who could see everything is present in
many religions. In Christianity and Islam, God is omniscient
and described as all-seeing, or omnivoyant. This was expressed
visually through the optical illusion of omnivoyance, where,
in statues and paintings, the eyes of Christ are painted or
carved so as to appear to be looking at the viewer no matter
where the viewer is standing.4 God’s surveillance of all things
might not have led to immediate consequences, but it was
certainly intended to have a disciplinary effect on believers.
The eye of god is a common motif in art history, especially
from the Renaissance onwards. Hieronymus Bosch’s painting
Seven Deadly Sins and Four Last Things (1505–10) is a classic
example: it is shaped like an eye, with Christ positioned in the
centre of the pupil, and scenes depicting the seven deadly sins
arranged around the iris of the eye. Under the figure of Christ
is a Latin motto: Cave cave deus videt – ‘Beware, beware, God
sees.’5 An omniscient being is both protective and potentially
88                      Seeing Everything

threatening if we do not follow the rules. Sarah Koellner argues,
building on work by Astrit Schmidt-Burkhardt, that ‘the del-
egation of the “symbolic function of surveillance of the divine
eye” to secular “electronic eyes” preserves the “phantasm of
[the] omnipresence of the divine eye”.’6
   The stories of omnivoyant gods and beings are very present
in contemporary machine vision, not just in the desires they
express but even in the names that are chosen. Gabriele de
Seta has detailed how the name of the ancient Chinese deity
Qianliyan, whose name can be translated as ‘thousand-mile
eyes’, has been used for machine vision applications ranging
from China Mobile’s smart home surveillance systems to
satellite-based environmental monitoring.7 Being able to see
everything at all times is also the promise and threat of military
surveillance systems such as ARGUS (Autonomous Real-Time
Ground Ubiquitous Surveillance), Angel Fire and the Gorgon
Stare,8 all named for mythical creatures with supernatural
visual abilities. These systems, which are known as Wide Area
Persistent Surveillance, consist of arrays of cameras on drones
that record video of large areas, allowing material to be reviewed,
rewound and fast forwarded so the exact location of suspects
can be tracked live. A gentler namesake of the mythological
Argus is Argos, another satellite system, launched in 1978 as
a climate and ocean-modelling project that was expanded for
wildlife tracking in the 1990s. Birds, marine animals and land
mammals around the globe wear collars or chips that allow
the Argos system to track their migrations. Rather than being
designed to monitor enemy forces and criminal suspects, this
network uses machine vision to interpret the needs of animals
so that governments can better protect them. For instance,
seeing the actual paths taken by migrating species allows us to
make highway overpasses for animals that are in places where
they will actually use them.9
   In religion, seeing is often, but not always, equated with
knowledge, and yet, even when knowledge is set in opposition
                       Seeing Everything                      89

to sight, the two tend to be connected. In Norse mythology,
Odin sacrificed an eye so that he could drink of the fountain of
knowledge. Even this was not enough, though: Odin yearned to
know still more. The knowledge he wanted could not be gained
intellectually or visually, but only through pain: by piercing
himself with his spear and by hanging himself from the tree
Yggdrasil for nine days. Contemporary humans have the same
issue. We can see time-lapse videos of melting glaciers but may
still be able to keep an emotional distance and put the dangers
of climate change out of mind. Sight is a sense that can allow us
some distance. Although we are visually immersed in our sur-
roundings, we can always close our eyes and refuse to engage
with what we see. We can’t do that with our other senses. You
can put your hands over your ears, but that won’t block out
all the sound. You can spit out something that tastes bad, but
the taste won’t instantly disappear. You may learn strategies to
help cope with pain, but you can’t shut your eyes and make it
go away. Vision gives us access to information but not neces-
sarily to knowledge.
   Another example of the opposition between sight and true
knowledge is found in the Christian story of doubting Thomas,
who does not believe the other disciples when they tell him
that Jesus died and came back to life: ‘The other disciples
therefore said unto him, We have seen the Lord. But he said
unto them, Except I shall see in his hands the print of the
nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust
my hand into his side, I will not believe.’10 Thomas needs to
see and touch Jesus’ wounds to believe it is really him. After
allowing Thomas to touch his wound, Jesus states that those
who believe without seeing shall be blessed. The rather strik-
ing visual image of Thomas placing his finger in Jesus’ wound
was common in Christian art from at least the sixth century
onwards. Caravaggio’s version of this motif, painted in 1601,
is one of the most famous, showing Thomas’s finger deeply
inserted into the pale and bloodless wound on Jesus’ chest.
90                     Seeing Everything

   Even though knowledge for Odin and Thomas is presented
as being most truly achieved through bodily sensation or blind
faith, both stories circle around the visual. Odin sacrificed an
eye, not a finger or an ear, and Thomas’s touching the wound
is one of the most well-known visual motifs in Christian art.
Vision and knowledge are deeply connected in Western cul-
ture and frequently connect to the divine. In Oak Park and
many other American towns, people ask smart surveillance
systems to watch over them. As I discussed in the introduction
to this book, Donna Haraway insists that this ‘infinite vision’
is a ‘god trick’, an impossibility – but that does not stop us
longing for it.


     Invisible watchers and the modern panopticon

In Gods and Robots, Adrienne Mayor argues that Argus, whose
full Greek name was Argus Panoptes, or Argus the all-seeing,
was an inspiration for Jeremy Bentham’s eighteenth-century
idea of the panopticon, a prison where guards in a central
tower could see all the prisoners at all times.11 The panopticon
was a circular prison with an observation tower at the centre
and prison cells all around, so a guard at the centre could see
all the cells and their inmates from a single vantage point. The
side of the cell that faces the centre is barred to prevent escape
but otherwise open, so prisoners can always be seen by the
guard. The prisoners know there is a guard watching them,
but the guard could be anyone. Jeremy Bentham proposed the
panopticon in 1785, and in the 1970s Michel Foucault argued
that Bentham’s design was a model for late twentieth-century
society.12 Foucault argued that societies in the late twentieth
century disciplined citizens in the same way as the panopticon
disciplined its prisoners. Earlier societies used physical force
to make people behave, using brutal and public whippings
and beheadings to show individuals what would happen to
                       Seeing Everything                      91

them if they misbehaved. By the end of the twentieth cen-
tury, discipline was less about externalised spectacle and
more internalised in each individual. Nonetheless, Foucault
argued, it has as much power to discipline the population as
the violence of earlier times. As in Bentham’s panopticon,
people in the late twentieth century knew anything they did
might be seen, so they adapted their behaviour accordingly.
They internalised the discipline that the government wanted.
In their book Facial Recognition, Mark Andrejevic and Neil
Selwyn argue that today’s smart surveillance is the opposite of
twentieth-century panoptic surveillance. In a panoptic society,
surveillance is visible. People behave because they know they
could be watched at any time. In today’s society, surveillance
is often hidden. When people are being watched all the time
there is no need to make them aware of it.13 Traditional CCTV
surveillance cameras were often designed to be visible, the
assumption being that people would behave better if they
knew they were being watched. Corner stores had signs show-
ing pictures of cameras or eyes or slogans such as ‘Smile, you’re
on camera!’ Today’s automated systems are more likely to be
hidden. Flock’s automated licence plate reader system relies
on cameras that are designed to blend in, and Ring’s doorbell
cameras are small and unassuming.
   The invisibility of smart surveillance also contrasts tra-
ditional social visual control. In a comparison of historical
African reciprocal, communal surveillance with the modern
panopticon, South African philosopher Pascah Mungwini
notes that ‘in indigenous shame cultures the panoptic gaze is
exercised by venerable individuals in one’s life as both mor-
tals and immortals, whereas the panoptic gaze provided by
modern technologies is largely anonymous and faceless.’14 The
moral censure of people who are significant to you ‘can never
compare to that posed by a machine manned by somebody
almost unknown or unrelated to the perpetrator,’ Mungwini
continues. Emotionally this may well be true. I would be more
92                     Seeing Everything

upset if a close friend disapproved of something I had done
than if a random stranger saw me doing that same thing.
Mungwini analyses this as a difference between historical cul-
ture and technological surveillance. In many cases, however, I
see a continuity from the historical concepts of a gaze from a
god or venerable individuals to a conception of technology as
having the power to protect the good and punish the wicked.
The omniscience of the gods and the jailers has been delegated
to machines.


                  Neighbourhood cameras

Oak Park’s drive to buy automated licence plate readers was
a response to a shoot-out between two cars speeding down a
residential street just after midnight on 7 November 2021. A
couple of days later, a local news website published video of the
shooting from a neighbour’s Ring doorbell camera.15 The video
shows a view of a quiet, dark street, partly obscured by white
porch pillars. A car drives by. Gun shots can be heard. A few
seconds later, two more cars drive past, the gun shots louder.
   The video is surprisingly tame for a ‘running gun battle’, as
the police described it to the Chicago Tribune on 12 November.
The cars don’t seem to be driving particularly fast. But, in a
way, the ordinariness of the video makes it all the more chill-
ing. Imagine waking at midnight to the sound of gunshots
outside your home and, in the morning, you see a grainy video
of your street on one of the local Facebook groups or on the
news. Imagine you find a bullet case in the wall of your house,
as three neighbours did. Of course you would be scared. I have
come to see this fear as a key contributor in the assemblages of
which surveillance cameras are part in the United States.
   After the shooting, a group of neighbours held meetings
and organised a campaign to improve safety. They suggested
several actions which the village of Oak Park could take.
                       Seeing Everything                       93

One idea was to put speed bumps on the roads and create
cul-de-sacs to make it more difficult to speed through the
neighbourhood. Interestingly enough, from the point of view
of a technology researcher like me, physically building speed
bumps or changing road patterns to improve safety would
require lengthy governmental approval processes. Installing
surveillance cameras, on the other hand, could be done quickly
and without much bureaucracy, because surveillance cameras
are not heavily regulated in the United States. So, a few months
later, the Oak Park police asked the village board for approval
to purchase twenty automated licence plate readers from Flock
Safety.
   Oak Park’s Village Board16 meets most Monday evenings.
On 21 March 2022, the main topic for discussion was whether
or not to implement Flock Safety’s cameras in Oak Park. The
village manager started the discussion with a presentation on
why the police department wanted to purchase the system.
‘Basically, what this is’, he explained, ‘is an objective platform
to identify vehicles and licence plates. It does not identify
individuals.’17 The Flock cameras might not have stopped the
shootout from happening, the argument went, but, had the
cars’ licence plate numbers been captured, the chances of
catching the perpetrators would have increased.
   The word objective is repeated throughout Flock’s market-
ing material and website. This dream that machine vision
and data-driven policing will give us objective knowledge is
prominent in technologists’ and politicians’ promotion of
the technology. Media scholar Mark Andrejevic calls this
‘framelessness’ – the idea that objectivity can be achieved by
representing the world in its entirety.18 Considering the same
idea from their fields of art history and visual studies, Max
Liljefors and Allen Feldman note a similar effect but call it the
‘pointless view’. The ‘pointless view’ lacks the specific point
of view we know from conventional images, where there is
usually a clear position from which whatever is represented is
94                     Seeing Everything

seen.19 This is Haraway’s ‘god trick’ again, the idea that knowl-
edge or vision can ever be total and not situated. When we are
scared and don’t feel we can trust that we are safe, we long for
that god trick. The illusion that it is possible – not for us, but
for someone or something – to see the world objectively is
comforting. We hope that surveillance cameras can provide
benevolent omniscient care. Or, at least, some of us do.


  Flock cameras as domesticated dragnet surveillance

Flock Safety was founded in 2017 by Garrett Langley, an engi-
neer who was the victim of crime himself and was frustrated by
the lack of evidence available to the police. Police had already
been using automated licence plate recognition for years at
this point, but Flock’s innovation was to provide much cheaper
cameras that were marketed to neighbourhood associations
and individual residents as much as to law enforcement agen-
cies.20 Their cameras also allowed users to search by several
characteristics in addition to the licence plate number, such
as the colour and make of the car or features such as whether
the car had a roof rack or was dented. By the time Oak Park
started debating whether to install the cameras in early 2022,
Flock had cameras in more than 1,500 cities in the United
States, registering a billion cars a year, and the company was
growing fast.
   Automated licence plate readers are a form of dragnet sur-
veillance: they gather data about everybody instead of only
targeting suspects. This is a major shift in how law enforcement
works, and the speed of the shift is astounding.21 In Predict and
Surveil, an ethnography of how the LAPD uses technology,
big data and machine learning, Sarah Brayne notes that, while
directed surveillance of specific targets merely amplifies prior
surveillance practices, dragnet surveillance ‘is associated with
fundamental transformations in police activity’.22 There has
                       Seeing Everything                      95

been little public debate about the very rapid spread of surveil-
lance in the United States. Oak Park’s resistance to the Flock
cameras was unusual. One reason for the lack of debate is that
the decisions to use surveillance are decentralised. The spread
of surveillance happens neighbourhood by neighbourhood,
and most neighbourhoods and village boards are small and do
not have very active political debates.23 Another reason is the
spread of smart surveillance in homes. You don’t even need to
buy a new camera to use smart surveillance at home. You can
subscribe to online services such as Watchman Scout, which
will analyse video from a home surveillance camera and alert
you if a car drives past with a licence plate matching an entry
on your watchlist.24 For a slightly higher monthly fee you get
more information: a log of all cars that pass, for instance, or a
log including the colour and make of each car.
    Flock Safety’s system is not simply a surveillance camera,
it is a network of cameras combined with software that uses
image recognition and machine learning to identify certain
kinds of behaviour. The promotional material doesn’t describe
machine learning beyond what is used for image recognition,
but the data produced by the system will be connected with
other datasets and can be shared with other police depart-
ments. Some of these departments will use systems such as
the data analytics platform Palantir to combine multiple data
sources and use machine learning algorithms for predictive
policing. And while Flock Safety is relatively simple, there are
other systems, such as Rekor,25 which combine ALPRs (auto-
mated license plate readers) with complex machine learning
not just for law enforcement but for city planning and crisis
management as well.
    Flock’s marketing strategy is to domesticate surveillance
technology. While most of their competitors target law
enforcement, Flock caters to a mixed market of families and
police departments and emphasises how ALPRs protect fami-
lies and children. Comparing the websites and promotional
96                      Seeing Everything

material of these companies shows this difference starkly.
Companies aimed more at governments and law enforcement,
such as Vigilant or Rekor, use dark blues and a corporate,
serious style, whereas Flock uses brightly coloured photos of
children, big headings and logos in green and purple, and a
promise to ‘Reduce crime in your community by up to 70%.’
Vigilant is a name that sets you on edge and perhaps too obvi-
ously plays on fear, whereas Flock Safety emphasises the safety
of the ‘flock’: the community itself. The cameras you can choose
between are named for birds as well: the entry level Sparrow
and the Falcon, which has faster upload speed and can send
instant alerts to law enforcement. The Raven detects audio
and recognises sounds such as gunshots, screeching tyres or a
window breaking. TALON is the Total Analytics Law Officer
Network, which connects cameras from different municipali-
ties and communities, providing law enforcement officers with
more and more data the more cameras connect to the net-
work. The idea of birds as all-seeing is clearly a strong influence
on surveillance systems, even systems such as these that are
land-based and not, like drones, airborne. An earlier system,
apparently no longer an active participant in the market, is
named Odin Technologies. Its logo features a raven perched
atop the O in Odin, referencing birds again: the mythological
ravens Hugin and Munin that brought Odin news from all over
the world.
   Flock cameras don’t look like surveillance cameras. They
are elegant black cylinders with a lens near the top, fastened
to poles or building walls. Some have solar panels angled
jauntily above them, while others run on batteries. A video
published on YouTube by Flock Safety shows an official from a
neighbourhood near Memphis talk about how well Flock cam-
eras fit into his city: ‘It’s a subtle presence. It’s not something
that’s going to be an eyesore. . . . It makes you feel safer but
doesn’t take away from the beauty around you.’26 The produc-
ers’ choice to include a clip showing a neighbourhood watch
                        Seeing Everything                        97

sign threatening that ‘All suspicious persons and activities are
immediately reported to our sheriff’s department’ is an inter-
esting contrast to this bucolic speech from the commissioner.
‘We look out for each other,’ the sign says in little letters at the
bottom.
   Disagreements about the value of surveillance cameras
aren’t always divided by racial lines, as they seemed to be in
Oak Park. Here it was groups fighting for racial equality who
were most sceptical of the Flock cameras and white and Asian
trustees on the village board who voted for it. In a fascinat-
ing analysis of the east side of Charleston in South Carolina,
Sarah Koellner describes a very different case, where a church
with a majority black congregation ran a fund-raiser to buy
Ring doorbells to protect the community.27 There had been
an increase in shootings in the neighbourhood, though there
were still extremely few in comparison to the number of shoot-
ings in Chicago. The pastor, Matthew Rivers, who is African
American, explained: ‘We decided to say OK, what can we
do then. And that was to raise funds to be able to give fami-
lies cameras so that we ourselves as a community can police
ourselves and help reduce crime in the neighborhood.’28 They
ended up buying 125 doorbell cameras for residents. In this
assemblage, surveillance technology was not forced on the
community; they chose to use it. It would be interesting to
see whether this assemblage works differently to those where
neighbourhood surveillance is installed by law enforcement
rather than by the community. Does the community retain
control over it?


Oak Park: how local history played into the assemblage

Although the Oak Park village board did finally vote to buy the
cameras, the board was split 3/3, with the president casting
the seventh and deciding vote, while stating that the decision
98                      Seeing Everything

was difficult. Her compromise was that the village should
install eight cameras instead of the twenty initially proposed.
Most towns adopt Flock Safety’s technology with no debate.
Oak Park was different for many reasons: its well-educated
citizens, the progressive politics of many, and, importantly, the
town’s legacy of trying since the 1960s to work against racist
structures.
   Oak Park is a town just outside the Chicago city limit that is
known for being socially liberal, diverse and relatively well off,
despite its being adjacent to some of the most crime-ridden
neighbourhoods in the state. Frank Lloyd Wright grew up in
Oak Park and designed many of the houses on the wide tree-
lined avenues that criss-cross the town in a regular grid. Ernest
Hemingway, another Oak Park native, is often quoted as having
described it as a place of ‘broad lawns and narrow minds’,
although nobody has been able to pin down a reliable source
for the alleged quote. In 2022 the front lawns of Oak Park
homes sported signs with slogans that don’t seem to match the
narrowness Hemingway once saw: ‘Hate has no home here.’
‘Black Lives Matter.’ ‘Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice
everywhere.’ ‘We stand with Ukraine.’ Yard signs declare less
ideological allegiances as well. ‘A Girl Scout lives here.’ ‘A high
school graduate lives here.’ ‘A member of the local dance team
(or middle school basketball team) lives here.’ ‘Please don’t let
your dog poop on the flowers.’ Other, smaller signs declare the
surveillance system used by the house: ‘Protected by Xfinity
Home, . . . by SimpliSafe, . . . by ADT, . . . by Ring.’
   By the time the Flock Camera debate began, I had been
living in Oak Park for nearly three months. My husband and
I were both visiting scholars at the University of Chicago and
took the Green Line from Oak Park to the university a few
times a week. Walking along the tree-lined streets I’d always
noticed the yard signs, but now I started looking more care-
fully at the porches to see whether they had Ring doorbell
cameras like the one that had captured the video of the cars in
                       Seeing Everything                      99

the November shooting. On some stretches of street, almost
every door had a shiny black Ring, with its silently gleaming
eye. Other streets had hardly any cameras. Overall, I’d guess
maybe a fifth of the houses I walked past in the neighbourhood
had Ring cameras. I stopped to photograph a door with a Ring,
then realised it would probably send its owner a video of me
photographing it. How strange that every step I take might be
watched, not only by the people I can see but by cameras on
every door, algorithmically tagging me as an unfamiliar face
and as a loiterer, questioning why I was spending a suspicious
amount of time looking back at the camera.
   Even before we moved here, I had heard of Oak Park’s
reputation for being progressive and for its systematic work
for diversity and equality.29 As I learned more about the local
history, I was taken aback at the extent of the racism that
work was trying to overcome. I learned about slavery and the
civil rights movement in school, of course, and I have read a
lot of scholarship about racism and technology, but I did not
grow up in the United States and I have not experienced racial
discrimination myself. The very local stories of Oak Park and
its surrounding neighbourhoods were far worse than I had
imagined. I need to include some of this history here to explain
how central it is in the assemblages of which the Oak Park
surveillance cameras are part. A few pages in a book such as
this certainly can’t give the lived experience of a black person
living in Oak Park or neighbouring Austin, but it will hopefully
be more useful than simply saying ‘there is structural racism.’
   Until the 1950s there were almost only white people living in
Oak Park and the surrounding neighbourhoods. At the start of
the twentieth century, 90 per cent of African Americans lived
in the South, but, in what is known as the Great Migration, 6
million of them moved to the Northeast, Midwest and West of
the United States. Most moved to large cities, and half a million
settled in Chicago. As black families moved into neighbour-
hoods, white families tended to move out, often to suburbs
100                    Seeing Everything

further away from the city. That’s what’s called ‘white flight’.
Businesses moved away when more black people arrived, and,
in the practice called redlining, banks refused to finance mort-
gages in ‘risky’ neighbourhoods.
   The Oak Park River Forest History Museum has a perma-
nent exhibition about this period, with many shocking stories.
When Percy Julian, a black chemist who pioneered synthe-
tising medicines and hormones, and his wife Anna Johnson
Julian, a sociologist, moved to Oak Park in 1951, their home
was firebombed twice, and there were many other racist
incidents that are shocking to read about today. Fortunately,
many people in Oak Park fought against the discrimination
and in 1963 established a Community Relations Commission,
which is still in operation, and ‘Hundreds Clubs’ for each block
in 1968 to foster neighbourhood cohesion.30 Although the
Hundreds Clubs no longer formally exist, block parties and
shared neighbourhood activities are still a common feature of
Oak Park life. People are friendly here.
   Oak Park also put legal systems in place to stop discrimi-
nation against African Americans. In 1968 a Fair Housing
Ordinance was passed. The Housing Center, opened in 1972
and still active today, promotes integration by sending white
tenants to vacant units where there are fewer white families and
black tenants to units with fewer black families.31 In addition,
‘for sale’ signs were banned and are still voluntarily avoided,
because white flight was driven by the idea that ‘everybody
else’ was moving, so one ‘for sale’ sign would tend to lead to
more white people moving away. Later, school districts were
redrawn to promote diversity32 and renamed for influential
African Americans, such as the poet Gwendolyn Brooks and
the chemist whose house had been firebombed, Percy Julian.
Even with all this work, the Oak Park police still stop black
people on the street six times as often as white people.33
   The neighbourhoods between Oak Park and the city are
among the most violent and the poorest neighbourhoods in
                       Seeing Everything                      101

the country. Next-door Austin, immediately to the east of
Oak Park and part of the city of Chicago, experienced white
flight in the mid-twentieth century. First it became a home
for middle-class African Americans, but then they moved to
the suburbs as crime rose and services in Austin decreased
as a result of redlining and other racist practices: 78 per cent
of people living in Austin today are African American, 15 per
cent are Hispanic and only 5 per cent are white; 39 per cent of
households earn less than $25,000 a year, and 64 per cent earn
less than $50,000 a year. 30 per cent of Austin residents have
no internet access. In Oak Park, 48 per cent of households
earn more than $100,000 a year; 70 per cent of adults have at
least a four-year college degree; 17 per cent of the population is
African American and 66 per cent is white.34
    Oak Park’s history and cultural context helps explain why
the Flock cameras were so hotly debated there rather than
being implemented without discussion, as in so many other
US neighbourhoods. The extreme inequality between Oak
Park and neighbouring communities is an important factor in
understanding how automated surveillance cameras are imple-
mented. This extreme inequality between neighbourhoods is
not at all unique to Oak Park but is a foundation of US society,
based on racist systems perpetuated over generations.35


         Ring doorbell videos and communal fear

The Flock Safety cameras add a layer of surveillance to a neigh-
bourhood that already has thousands of surveillance cameras.
Oak Park, like many other neighbourhoods, is inundated by
Ring doorbell cameras. Press the doorbell on a Ring, and the
homeowner gets an alert on their phone and can see and talk
with the visitor before letting them in. With a Ring Protect
monthly subscription, owners can use their Ring as a smart
surveillance camera that will record any person who gets close
102                    Seeing Everything

to the door and send alerts to the owner. Ring is owned by
Amazon, which also provides the app Neighbors by Ring for
people to share news about local crime and lost pets. Neighbors
integrates with Ring cameras, allowing users to easily upload
videos that may or may not show package theft, a person trying
to open car doors in a parking lot in the middle of the night,
or a suspicious looking person approaching a porch door and
then leaving. Neighbors by Ring is only available in the United
States, although Ring doorbells may be obtained in many
countries.
   Rahim Kurwa, a criminologist and sociologist who
researches race, policing and residential segregation, argues
that apps such as Neighbors are a form of ‘social policing’ used
to build a digitally gated community that disproportionately
targets black residents as ‘suspicious’ and thus supports the
white preference for segregation that continues to this day.36
This is the same ‘digital redlining’ argument used against auto-
mated licence plate readers.
   The first video I saw when I installed the Neighbors app on
my phone showed a carjacking. The video (recorded on a Ring
Video Doorbell 3 Plus, the app tells me) shows a view of the
street from a porch with two narrow arches. A car is parked by
the kerb at the end of the path from the porch, and a woman
carrying something that may be a baby in a car seat walks away
from it, followed by a man in a red vest. The man walks slowly
but threateningly towards her, pointing something at her that
could be a gun, though it is impossible to tell from the grainy
video. We hear another man yelling, his voice close to the
camera’s microphone, perhaps standing in the doorway of his
house: ‘Oy! Get the fuck away’ – the fear clear in his voice. On
one side a person who looks like a young teen runs anxiously
backwards and forwards. The woman and her pursuer disap-
pear behind a post that obscures them from view, then the
man in the red vest runs back out towards the car, opens the
door and gets into the driver’s seat. The woman and teen back
                        Seeing Everything                        103

away, re-entering the field of view, and the man, presumably
the father of this family, yells ‘Get inside!’ It isn’t until several
days later I think to look at where the video was recorded and
realise it wasn’t in Oak Park at all, but several miles away from
our house.
   The video is disturbing to watch, and the many comments
on the post combine horror at what has happened, concern for
the family, and concern for their own safety. ‘Where exactly
was this?’ is a repeated question. People want to know how
close they were to danger. ‘Thank you for informing us . . .
thank goodness the family is ok . . . but can you confirm what
streets this took place on,’ one neighbour writes. Several
people say that they worry about the trauma the incident must
have caused the family. Others note how scared they are about
how common incidents like this have become: ‘What a scary
world we are living in. You just can’t be careful enough because
it can happen under any circumstances.’ Another neighbour
comments: ‘You can’t even leave your house without someone
trying to rob or carjack you!’ This is a level of fear I had not
imagined existing here. As I read, I realise that people’s fear of
this kind of crime actually stops them living their lives in the
way they would like. One woman writes: ‘This right here is why
I don’t leave the house with my babies without my husband.’37
   After years of decline, crime has been on the rise in Chicago
since the start of the pandemic, as in the United States overall.
It feels very different here from when my husband, kids and
I spent a semester in nearby Wicker Park in 2014. Back then,
the L, as Chicago’s iconic elevated trains are called, was full of
commuters and other travellers, and often there was standing
room only. I don’t remember feeling scared on public trans-
port. In 2022 the carriages on the Green Line, which runs
from Oak Park to the University of Chicago and beyond, are
almost empty except for homeless people sleeping or smoking.
I can pass through the gates to the station without speaking to
anyone, without looking anyone in the eye or seeing a smiling
104                    Seeing Everything

face. I don’t have to buy a ticket: I just hold my watch to the
gate for it to automatically dock $2.50 off my transit account.
Maybe I’ll try to smile at the transit worker sitting in the booth
by the entrance, darkened glass hiding their face from the few
people travelling. They rarely look up to meet my gaze. There
are surveillance cameras on every platform and in every car-
riage of the L. But there are no visible conductors or drivers of
the trains,38 and I only rarely saw security guards or other staff
on platforms.
   It is impossible to be objective when a person you love is a
victim of crime. My mind churned over all the ways the assault
on my husband could have been far worse. I was furious at
the other people on the platform who didn’t help. I was angry
at the Chicago Transit Authority (the CTA) and the city of
Chicago and the world in general for creating a situation where
human conductors and drivers have been replaced by surveil-
lance cameras that silently record without intervening. At the
same time I was reading voraciously about smart surveillance
and how it is promoted as a solution to all this.
   Statistics show violent crime is increasing rapidly on public
transport and everywhere else in Chicago. I spent hours look-
ing at the datasets published by the city of Chicago, using their
online tools to create visualisations of every crime committed
on a CTA platform. Data visualisations are themselves a way
of seeing the world that prioritise certain kinds of knowledge:
data, numbers, deviations from the norm, but not the stories
of individuals or the reasons why the numbers increase or
decrease.39 Data visualisations are a kind of machine vision, a
way of representing the world visually based on data. They are
also decontextualised and sanitised – numbers in neat columns,
or pretty coloured graphs on a screen, not the lived experience
of violence. News searches gave me stories to go with the num-
bers. The day after my husband’s assault, a customer assistant
got into an argument with a traveller, the newspaper reported,
and as the man walked away the customer assistant drew a gun
                       Seeing Everything                      105

and shot him three times.40 Most startling was a story from
just a few months earlier: a University of Chicago student was
killed by a stray bullet while taking the L from the university.
He would have boarded the train at the same station as we did
on our commute home.41 I was starting to understand that
Americans drive not simply because it’s convenient, but to
stay safe.
   Once I started to pay attention to it, I saw fear everywhere I
went. At the supermarket, the friendly Hispanic man helping
me to pack my groceries asked about the refleks fastened to
my bag. I explained that it’s a reflective strip that I put around
my wrist when it’s dark so that it’s easier for drivers to see me
walking. ‘In Norway, we all wear these,’ I cheerfully explain.
‘Oh, we don’t walk after dark around here!’ he said, looking
quite concerned for me. ‘You want to be careful!’ At that point,
I was scared of taking the L, but it genuinely hadn’t occurred
to me to worry while walking on well-lit Oak Park streets after
sunset. A couple of days later, I ate lunch at a café. The women
at the table next to me were chatting loudly about some out-
of-town visitors one of them was expecting, and, primed as I
now was to listen for fear, I took note of the horror in their
voices at the idea that the visitors might ride the L to get from
downtown Chicago to Oak Park: ‘She said she’d seen we lived
right near a station so she’d take the L!’ The other woman
gasped, as her friend continued: ‘Well, I told her she was crazy,
please take an Uber!’
   Everyone wants to feel safe. I understand why people who
feel as if they can’t safely walk outside at 8 pm, or take public
transport, might feel that surveillance cameras are a worth-
while price to pay to regain some freedom. When we’re scared
and technology firms tell us that they can keep us safer, it’s
not surprising that people buy into it. Living in Chicago for
a few months, I realise that fear of crime doesn’t only make
people feel unsafe and reduce their trust in their community
and government, it also limits people’s freedom of movement.
106                    Seeing Everything

Unfortunately, there is no evidence that the trade-off works.
Surveillance isn’t reducing crime in the USA. I’ll return to that
later on, but first we need to understand better how surveil-
lance is seen as a solution.


            Surveillance as a promise of safety

Seeing a video of your neighbour having their car stolen at
gunpoint right outside their house is frightening, and the
Neighbors app makes every video feel close even if the incident
actually happened miles away. Most of the comments on the
carjacking post were sympathetic or expressed horror or fear,
but one suggests a solution: ‘This is why we need cameras on
every block.’ The day before, the Oak Park Village Board had
decided to install Flock cameras. Emotions ran high in the
public statements read to the board on 21 March, and many of
the statements referenced frightening stories to illustrate their
fears, stories about situations where a culprit could have been
held responsible if only Flock cameras had been installed: the
drive-by shootout on 7 November, and a child riding their bike
to school when they were knocked over by a reckless driver
who didn’t stop and will never be held responsible.
   Others told stories that positioned the Flock cameras as a
threat instead of as a saviour. Several people mentioned a story
that had been on the national news, about an African American
family in Colorado that was stopped by police because the
Flock system had incorrectly identified their car as being on
a list of stolen vehicles. The police pulled the family out of the
car at gunpoint. A widely circulated video shot by a bystander
showed the four children lying face down on the black asphalt.
The two oldest have their hands cuffed behind their backs. You
can hear them crying, wailing, ‘I want my father, I want to go
home!’ The littlest one, a six-year-old with bright pink braids,
leans up on her hands, trying to understand what is going on.42
                        Seeing Everything                      107

   The debate about Flock in Oak Park was driven by residents
who were scared and who wanted to feel safer both in their
homes and in their neighbourhood. Flock promised to provide
that safety. Yet when the Oak Park village manager presented
the solution to the board, he carefully stated that Flock was
not intended to deter or prevent crime; it would be only an
investigative tool.43 The tool would not be used for traffic viola-
tions or making sure people stop at stop signs; it would be
used only in situations when drivers were involved in crimes,
he assured the board. Most Oak Park residents presumably do
not see themselves as likely to commit a crime, but many, if
not most, will have got a ticket at some point for not stopping
at a red light, parking in the wrong place or driving a little too
fast. Reassuring people that Flock cameras wouldn’t be used
to police these things strengthened the idea that they were to
catch outsiders, not Oak Parkers.
   People who disagreed with the idea of the cameras argued
both that they would make them less safe and that it was unnec-
essarily costly and took attention away from other solutions
that would do more to prevent crime, such as making it more
difficult to drive fast by changing the roads. Adding cul-de-
sacs, stop signs and speed bumps would be more effective ways
of reducing the risk of people driving in off the expressway and
having a shootout in an otherwise peaceful Oak Park street.
Many of the public comments read to the board on 21 March
argued that black and brown people in particular would be
made less safe by the Flock licence readers, because they are
the people who are at greater risk when stopped by the police.
   The most common argument against automated surveillance
technologies such as the Flock cameras or facial recognition is
the risk of misidentification that leads to wrongful arrests or
individuals being stopped or questioned by police unnecessar-
ily. I don’t believe that anyone in Oak Park wants surveillance
because they are deliberately racist. They simply want to stay
safe in a society with deep-rooted problems and hope that
108                    Seeing Everything

surveillance will help stop crime. But, as Ruha Benjamin
writes in Race after Technology, racism ‘is not only a symptom
or outcome, but a precondition for the fabrication of such
technologies.’ Racism, she contends, is ‘not just an ideology
or history, but . . . a set of technologies that generate patterns
of social relations, and these become Black-boxed as natural,
inevitable, automatic.’44
   Racism exists in all countries, but it plays out in different
ways in different places. There is a common assumption that
the United States is a tech leader because it has excellent
researchers, a strong start-up culture and lax privacy regu-
lations. The USA has clearly gone a lot further than Europe
in terms of predictive policing and covering the nation with
smart surveillance cameras. An important actor in the assem-
blage that drives the spread and technological development of
smart surveillance is, tragically, the inequity between neigh-
bourhoods that is caused by the country’s racist past. Ruha
Benjamin might say this racism is encoded in Flock Safety’s
cameras. Perhaps it is. Perhaps the technology could be used
differently if in a different assemblage – if we took the cameras
and dashboards and alerts out of Oak Park and Chicago and
put them in Bergen or London or Nairobi. Or perhaps the
particularly US brand of racism stays part of the assemblage
and shifts to the new location, supplemented by local fears and
inequalities.


   Machine vision situations as affective assemblages

Capsule stories such as these are machine vision situations:
events or scenes involving machine vision technologies as an
agent. The Ring doorbell camera automatically recorded the
shootout on 9 November and made it possible for the home-
owner to share the video with neighbours and news sites,
increasing anxiety about safety in their neighbourhood. There
                        Seeing Everything                      109

are many other agents in this assemblage in addition to the
doorbell camera: bullet casings, cars, guns, frightened resi-
dents, and the drivers of the cars who perhaps chose to fight
in a quiet neighbourhood street instead of on the expressway
because of the cameras there. Assemblages are fluid, with dif-
ferent agents coming into focus depending on how we tell
the story. The situation that started the Flock camera debates
was the actual shootout and the neighbours’ experiences of it.
There is also the imaginary situation: the version of this story,
imagined by the neighbours who lobbied the village board
to buy the cameras, where Flock cameras had already been
installed. The cameras would have identified the cars. Maybe, if
the cars were stolen, the police would have been alerted in time
to stop the shootout from ever happening. If not, the police
would have had the information they needed to make arrests
and put the drivers behind bars. Perhaps they are right, and the
shooters would have been arrested. Weighing that possibility
up against the possibilities of false arrests is not an easy task.
   I spent time in the previous chapters analysing machine
vision as assemblages. A technology can have very different
roles and agency when participating in different assemblages.
Machine vision situations are assemblages, but when we retell
them we tend to use familiar narrative structures. There is
often a villain and a saviour, a crisis and a hoped-for resolu-
tion. The stories about the shootout in Oak Park feature the
Flock cameras as potential saviours, helpers that will enable a
resolution of the crisis. In the story of the Colorado children
handcuffed and face down on the asphalt, the Flock cameras
play the role as villain, not saviour. The technology misidenti-
fied the family’s car. The police officers followed their district
guidelines to treat all stops of stolen vehicles as high-risk situ-
ations where suspects should be handcuffed.
110                    Seeing Everything

           Does machine vision reduce crime?

The only real argument for using automated licence plate read-
ers is that they will make neighbourhoods safer by reducing
crime and helping to solve incidents. Unfortunately, there is
very little evidence that this kind of surveillance really does
help reduce or solve crime.
   Automated systems such as Flock Safety are relatively
new, and there is not a lot of systematic research on them
yet. However, traditional CCTV cameras have been used for
security and in policing for decades. A systematic review of
forty years of research studies on CCTV surveillance up to
2017 led by Eric L. Piza, an associate professor at John Jay
College of Criminal Justice in New York, identified seventy-six
research studies on CCTV’s effect on crime published in 2017
or earlier.45 Taken together, the studies show a modest but
statistically significant reduction in crime, but only for certain
types and locations, and only when combined with other forms
of active intervention, such as increased or more targeted police
patrols, community outreach, or even better lighting. Piza and
his team found that vehicle and property crimes were reduced
by around 14 per cent and drug-related crime by 26 per cent,
but they found no significant effect for violent crime or disor-
der. They also note that studies of CCTV in the United States
did not find a reduction in any type of crime. They speculate
that this could be because CCTV surveillance was not as often
combined with active intervention in the US studies as it was
in other parts of the world.
   We don’t yet have forty years of research on how automated
systems such as Flock affect crime, and Piza and his colleagues
specify that none of the studies they found discussed automated
detection systems. It is possible that automated and immedi-
ate alerts to law enforcement will make it easier to provide
the active intervention that Piza and his team found reduced
crimes. This requires more human resources, though – more
                        Seeing Everything                      111

police officers or social workers who can respond to the auto-
mated alerts. Machine vision alone won’t solve the problem.
And, as I’ll discuss, automated systems have a high number of
false alerts, leading to unnecessary police encounters that can
be traumatic for innocent people, and also wasting time for
police officers.
   Other smart surveillance systems are also in use in the Chicago
area, but unfortunately data does not show them being very
effective. ShotSpotter is used by the Chicago Police Department
to automatically detect the sound of gunshots and immediately
alert the police. This is machine hearing, not machine vision,
but, like ALPRs, ShotSpotter combines dragnet surveillance and
massive data gathering with machine learning algorithms to
identify suspicious events – gunshots or a stolen vehicle – in real
time and send automated alerts to the police. The ShotSpotter
website calls the system a ‘Precision Policing Platform™’, noting
that it is ‘highly data-driven’.46 However, as with ALPRs, there
are many false alerts. A study by the MacArthur Justice Center
found that 86 per cent of ShotSpotter deployments of police
officers in Chicago turn up no crime at all, resulting in more
than sixty unnecessary deployments of officers every day.47 The
City of Chicago’s inspector general released a report in 2021
citing similar numbers, together with the additional finding
that ‘the introduction of ShotSpotter technology in Chicago has
changed the way some CPD members perceive and interact
with individuals present in areas where ShotSpotter alerts are
frequent.’48 It was found that the police had begun to stop and
pat down people who were in a place known often to gener-
ate ShotSpotter alerts, even when there had been no alert.49
There have also been serious cases of wrongful arrest based on
ShotSpotter evidence, including one where a man was impris-
oned for a year on a charge of murder before being released due
to a lack of any evidence beyond the ShotSpotter data.50
   But maybe ShotSpotter still reduces gun violence over-
all? Unfortunately, it doesn’t seem to. A national study
112                    Seeing Everything

comparing homicide rates from 1999 to 2016 in locations
where ShotSpotter was or was not used found the technol-
ogy had ‘no significant impact on firearm-related homicides
or arrest outcomes’.51 A 2018 partially randomised study had a
similar finding: the technology resulted in more than twice as
many gunshot reports, but there was no significant difference
in the number of confirmed shootings. This meant there was
an increased workload for police officers who had to investi-
gate more alerts, but with no gain in terms of identification
or investigation of incidents.52 Despite the lacklustre results
from both national studies and Chicago’s own data, Chicago’s
mayor at the time, Lori Lightfoot, renewed the city’s contract
with ShotSpotter for another two years just a few weeks after
receiving the very critical report from the inspector general.
The belief in data is strong. Even the inspector general’s report,
which found that the available data did not clearly show that
the value of ShotSpotter outweighed its costs,53 concluded by
saying that perhaps the data isn’t good enough and that, with
more data that improves ‘the ability to match ShotSpotter to
other police records’, we may find that ShotSpotter is actually
effective.
   Why would we think machine vision technologies such as
Flock’s cameras will work differently from ShotSpotter? If you
believe that cameras deter crime, it follows that, if most places
are heavily surveilled, a place without cameras would attract
crime. This argument was put forwards by Illinois police when
they installed cameras along the I-290 expressway that cuts
through Oak Park. ‘They threaten one another and they say
let’s take that out to the expressway,’ the Illinois state police
director Brendan Kelly told a journalist. It’s like duelling, he
explained. Criminals choose the expressway for their duels
because there are cameras everywhere else.54 Politicians
proudly report on arrests made using information from the
cameras, even though expressway shootings continued to
increase after the cameras were installed.
                        Seeing Everything                      113

    Fear and distrust feed the surveillance industry

The desire for objective evidence that we imagine surveillance
cameras and machine vision can provide seems particularly
strong in a country such as the United States, where people no
longer trust each other, or authorities, or the news. I’m used
to living in Norway, where people generally trust each other
and institutions. People in the United States are well below
the global average when it comes to trust, and, since the pan-
demic, Americans’ trust in authorities ranging from scientists
to public school principals, to police officers, to journalists, to
the military has dropped even further.55
   People long for surveillance and data-driven policing because
they don’t trust other humans. This hypothesis is supported by
a recent quantitative survey in the United States that found
that individuals who distrust other people and institutions are
more positive towards AI-driven content moderation, while
those with more trust in each other are more likely to trust that
content moderation by humans is accurate.56 I think dataism,
that ‘belief in the objective quantification and potential track-
ing of all kinds of human behavior and sociality’, to use José
van Dijck’s words, is stronger in societies where people don’t
trust each other and don’t trust their leaders. The same would
go for technological solutionism, the idea that technology can
solve societal problems. We believe in technology: a return to
faith-based religion as our trust in one another fades.
   Media exposure to news about crime increases people’s fear
for their own safety. Study after study has shown this, decade
after decade. Although crime rates overall have dropped in
the last half century or so, coverage of crime in the media has
increased.57 In Gallup’s annual surveys of whether Americans
think there is more or less crime than the previous year, the
majority almost always answer incorrectly that there is more.58
Consumption of crime news can lead to trusting other people
less. Television news makes people more afraid for their safety
114                    Seeing Everything

than print news, and increased use of social media and alterna-
tive online news sources also increases fear. Conversely, people
who live in walkable neighbourhoods and chat with their
neighbours are less frightened by crime news than others.59
   It’s not just that distrust in other humans increases our
belief that technology will keep us safe: there’s also a reinforc-
ing cycle where surveillance cameras feed our fear, making us
feel less safe, leading us to distrust people even more and to
want more surveillance cameras. There is a cycle of interac-
tion between institutional surveillance by law enforcement,
the state and corporations and home surveillance set up by
individuals.
   Do doorbell videos cause fear? Do automated alerts raise
our sense of the world being full of threats? The pandemic
is obviously an important actor in this. The inconsistency of
national guidance meant that people in the United States had
less trust in the government’s ability to protect them from
COVID than those in many other countries. The pandemic
also led to less physical interaction among people, with video
as an intermediary between us. This lasted much longer in the
USA than in Norway, where schools were closed for only a
few weeks. In Oak Park, schools operated completely remotely
from March through December of 2020 and partially so in
the first half of 2021, with kids in school only every second or
third week. Did Zoom and Ring doorbells make Oak Park less
physically connected, scared of each other’s bodies, longing for
connection and safety onscreen? Does heightened surveillance
increase our desire for yet more surveillance? Do Americans
who are scared of COVID and of crime simply feel safer expe-
riencing the world at a distance through their smart cameras?
   Surveillance technology in the United States feeds upon and
encourages fear and distrust. The sense that there is nothing
that can be done to make things better is also a factor. It’s
understandable, in a country where deep structural change
seems insurmountable, that people clutch at things they can
                       Seeing Everything                     115

actually do. Installing more technology lets us feel that we are
actively doing something. Not doing anything leads to numb
despair.
   Understanding this uniquely American assemblage of
surveillance systems, algorithms, fear, distrust, decentralised
police departments, racist histories, local activism and tech
start-up culture is key to understanding how technology does
not work in the same way in every context. If you take Flock
Safety’s cameras and install them in another context, they will
be used differently – and yet some of the influences of the other
participants in the assemblage for which they were developed
are encoded into them. Just as an animal’s vision is highly
specialised to serve its specific needs, machine vision’s sensory
apparatus and processing is designed to serve the needs of
the context – or assemblage – it is developed in and for. That
assemblage includes the developers and salespeople, not just
those using the technology.
   Machine vision isn’t the main culprit in the increases in
crime and distrust in the United States, but it is a very potent
agent in an assemblage of profiteering companies, a dead-
locked political system, centuries of racism and inequality,
and a growing anxiety and distrust in the population. Machine
vision and other technologies are also often presented as a
solution to the problems, although there is a lack of evidence
showing that they help, and many situations in which they
may do harm and reduce the trust that communities depend
on. But, in a trust vacuum, we need to trust something. So we
buy Flock cameras and vote for politicians who promise ‘data-
driven policing’. We believe in machines because it feels like
there is nothing else left to believe in. Enlightenment human-
ism moved religion from its previously central place in society.
Now we are replacing religion with a new faith in technology.
                               4

               Being Seen:
           The Algorithmic Gaze



When was the last time you met someone’s gaze? Maybe you
passed someone on the street and happened to look into each
other’s eyes for a moment before walking on? Or perhaps you
gazed into the eyes of a good friend or a lover or a child? The
reciprocity of seeing and being seen is so crucial to human
society that our eyes have evolved not just to see in a way that
is specifically human but also to be seen by other humans. In
contrast to other primates, the whites of our eyes are visible,
allowing us to see where other humans are looking. Humans
can tell if another human is looking into their eyes.1 If machine
vision technologies ‘see everything’, as I discussed in chapter 3,
does this shape our relationship with them, just as seeing
and being seen builds relationships between humans? Does
machine vision return our gaze? How do different machine
vision assemblages see us differently?
   The subtitle of this chapter, ‘the algorithmic gaze’, is a
reference to the argument by the cinema theorist Laura
Mulvey that cinema supports ‘the male gaze’. Mulvey’s paper,
which was published in 1972, contended that the camera in
mainstream cinema takes the perspective of a male voyeur,
portraying women as objects to be looked at rather than
                           Being Seen                         117

subjects in their own right.2 Mulvey’s concept has been deeply
influential in cinema studies, and the idea of a technologi-
cal ‘gaze’ has been taken up by many other theorists. Do the
algorithms of contemporary machine vision systems situate
humans in a particular way, as Mulvey argued that cinema
tended to objectify women? What does it mean to be seen by
machine vision?
   In chapter 2 we saw how Vertov, Svilova and Kaufman
framed the ‘kino-eye’ as seeing the world in a radically dif-
ferent way from humans. In contrast, Mulvey saw cinema as
replicating the ‘male gaze’ of human patriarchy, where women
are expected to be passive objects rather than active subjects.
This tension between understanding machine vision as radi-
cally non-human and as reifying existing societial biases is also
very much present in contemporary debates about technology.
Mulvey is of course not really describing a gaze that is innate to
all cinema. It would be more correct to say that the male gaze
is produced in a certain assemblage where the technologies of
cinema are combined with a patriarchal society and the com-
mercial system of big budget Hollywood cinema. When the
technologies of cinema are combined with the revolutionary
spirit and relative gender equality of the early Soviet Union, we
get instead the alien gaze of the kino-eye. As argued in earlier
chapters, it is the gaze or the Umwelt of the assemblage we
need to consider, not just the individual technologies or film
directors.
   The previous chapter explored the conflicting desires of
wanting to be kept safe by smart surveillance and of fear-
ing that the gaze of surveillance cameras will be oppressive,
unjust, incorrect, and that it may make us more afraid and less
trusting of each other. In this chapter, I discuss other ways
machine vision looks back at us. I explore the algorithmic gaze
of machine vision through three case studies that examine
different ways in which it looks back at us. First, I discuss
selfie filters and the ways biometrics and facial recognition
118                        Being Seen

algorithms conceive of human faces. Selfies and selfie filters
are a very immediate route to experiencing this algorithmic
gaze. Using datasets of tens of thousands of photos of human
faces, neural networks can be trained to recognise faces, to
classify them by characteristics such as gender or age, and to
generate new images of potential faces. My second case study
explores how machine vision is used to automate grocery
shopping, library access and other interactions that formerly
required us to interact with other humans. Smart cameras are
used to watch us in spaces where previously we would have
met other humans. Finally, I explore a fictional example of a
benevolent AI dictator, Thunderhead, from Neal Shusterman’s
young adult series of novels Scythe (2016), Thunderhead (2018)
and The Toll (2019). Thunderhead watches over each human
on the planet with genuine, loving care.


                      Normalising faces

Machine learning has a normalising effect. It builds a model
of the most common patterns in a dataset to make mean-
ingful predictions or inferences. It produces stereotypes, not
defamiliarizations. When you take a photo on your phone,
its AI adjusts the light, colour and contrast to fit the most
likely scenario based on its training data. This means that,
for example, if you try to take a photo of the orange skies of
a Californian wildfire, the camera might correct the colour
to be grey.3 If camera software is trained to take photos of a
person only when their eyes are open, but the training dataset
included only Caucasian faces, it may fail to take a photo of an
Asian person’s face because it fails to recognise that their eyes
are open.4 The AI is trained to predict what a photo should
look like based on statistic probabilities, and it will adjust any
‘abnormalities’ to approach this statistically desired image. I’ll
return to what this normalising effect means below.
                           Being Seen                          119

    While camera software performs many automated adjust-
ments to our photographs without our active intervention,
selfie filters allow us to deliberately play with the ways the
camera sees us. Throughout history, artists and amateur
photographers have used self-portraits to deliberately create
self-representations (as I discussed Frederick Douglass doing
in chapter 1) but also to see themselves differently by experi-
menting with different poses and effects. Artists would pose in
unusual ways or dress up in order to create particular impres-
sions. People pulled faces in photo booths and practised poses
and facial expressions. Magazine articles, online videos and
commercial online classes promise to teach people how to pose
their bodies and smile in order to be as photogenic as possible. I
wrote about this in Seeing Ourselves through Technology. Selfie
filters or lenses are where it really gets interesting in terms of
explicitly playing with machine vision, though, because they
bring attention to our interactions with machine vision algo-
rithms. Selfies shared in social media have always been about
communication and interaction. As Paul Frosh wrote in 2015,
the selfie ‘says not only “see this, here, now”, but also “see me
showing you me.” It points to the performance of a commu-
nicative action rather than to an object, and is a trace of that
performance.’5 When you play with a selfie lens you engage in a
performative interaction with machine vision. Then, perhaps,
you send the photo you took to a friend, sharing a trace of that
performance with them.
    Selfie filters use the same basic technology as facial recogni-
tion systems. The algorithm analyses the image of your face in
real time to find your eyes, eyebrows, nose, mouth and chin
and then maps an altered image to your face. On the one hand,
this is another example of how the same technology can be put
to very different uses, with different effects. The same basic
algorithms can be used to identify suspects in a crime or for
playing around with selfies. On the other hand, selfie filters
might accustom us to biometrics and facial recognition more
120                       Being Seen

broadly. Many apps using filters start by visualising how they
identify our facial features, overlaying the image of our face
with a grid of lines or dots. This familiarises us with the idea
of biometrics and facial analysis and will perhaps make us less
likely to object to machine learning in other situations.6
   Another way selfie lenses and image filters affect us is by
normalising our idea of what we should look like. Machine
learning algorithms and neural networks look for patterns in
the datasets on which they’re trained and create a model based
on the most common patterns. If a model takes too much
notice of unusual cases and outliers, it will be unable to make
useful generalisations. This kind of exaggerated attention to
detail is described as overfitting and gives a high error rate in
the machine learning algorithm. Avoiding overfitting leads to
the opposite problem and causes normalisation. For instance,
we would expect a system trained on images on the inter-
net with English-language captions to be biased in the sense
that it will be better at recognising or generating images from
Western contexts.7 The model will also normalise the data. If
80 per cent of the people shown in the training dataset images
were white, the model may generate new images where 95 per
cent of the people are white, because it has found that white
people are ‘normal’.
   The idea of there even being a ‘norm’ is less than two cen-
turies old. In his introduction to the Disability Studies Reader,
Lennard Davis points out how the idea of not conforming to a
norm depends on the idea that there is a norm or an average
and that being normal is desirable. Davis explains that it was
not until the 1840s that the words ‘normal’ and ‘normality’
were first used in the current sense of ‘constituting, conform-
ing to, not deviating or different from, the common type or
standard, regular, usual’. The concept of normality emerged
from the new fields of demographics and statistics that grew
rapidly from the early nineteenth century on. The early Belgian
statistician Adolphe Quetelet was a key contributor to what
                          Being Seen                         121

Davis calls the ‘generalized notion of the normal as an impera-
tive’. Quetelet used data visualisations to plot the distribution
of features of military recruits, such as their height, and found
the regular bell curve pattern known in statistics as a normal
distribution. If height is plotted along the x-axis, and the
number of people who are that height is plotted on the y-axis,
you get a curve that looks like an upside-down U or a bell. Just
a few people are very short or very tall, and a lot of people are
more or less the same height as each other.
   Quetelet took this one step further by arguing that l’homme
moyen, the average man, was the most perfect, and that indi-
viduals whose bodies and morals were closest to the average
were superior. For the first time, the definition of beauty and
moral goodness was determined mathematically and statisti-
cally rather than by theological laws, artists’ renditions or an
individual’s preferences.8 As Lennard Davis notes, ‘the aver-
age then paradoxically becomes a kind of ideal, a position to
be wished.’ This privileging of the average is a marked break
from earlier traditions that saw the ideal body, represented for
instance in paintings of Venus, as something ‘mytho-poetical’,
a ‘divine body’ that is ‘not attainable by a human’.9
   There is actually no such thing as an average human. In 1952
Gilbert S. Daniels, a US Air Force engineer, sifted through
detailed measurements of 4,063 flying personnel. He started
off by noting that it could be useful to find average ranges for
specific measurements such as height: 90 per cent of the pilots
were between 5 feet 5 inches (165 cm) and 6 feet 1 inch (185 cm)
tall, which is useful to know if you want to decide how tall you
need to make a doorway so that most people don’t have to bow
their head to walk through it. For making clothes or designing
an aeroplane cockpit, though, you need to consider more than
just height, and this is where it gets tricky. Daniels chose ten
measurements that are useful for making clothes: height, chest
circumference, sleeve length, and so on. He then checked to
see how many men fell within the middle 30 per cent range
122                        Being Seen

for all measurements. The fall off was sharp: 1,055 men were
of approximately average height, but only 302 also had aver-
age chest circumference, and, of these, only 143 had average
sleeve length, and so on. By the time Daniels reached the ninth
measurement, thigh circumference, only two of the original
4,063 men were left, and neither of them had average crotch
length, the tenth measurement. Even without descending as
far as to measuring crotch length, the data clearly shows the
diversity of human bodies.10 None of us is truly average. We
are all outliers.
   Machine learning models are based on statistics, though, and
so they emphasise the norm, not outliers and details. This often
leads to what computer scientists call bias amplification. In this
sense, all machine learning systems can be called normalising
machines. Mushon Zer-Aviv’s art installation The Normalizing
Machine, which I mentioned in chapter 1, takes photographs of
the exhibition visitors and dissects each photo, assessing how
‘normal’ each facial feature is as compared to those of the other
visitors. The Normalizing Machine directly references the work
of nineteenth-century anthropometrics, particularly Bertillon’s
system for categorising criminals based on photographs of
their faces and measurements of their bodies. Another artwork
that explores and critiques the normalising effect of machine
learning is Jake Elwes’s Zizi – Queering the Dataset. In this
work, Elwes took an existing dataset of faces and added 1,000
images of drag queens and overtly genderqueer people and used
machine learning to train a model that would generate new,
‘queered’ faces.11 While Zer-Aviv’s work enacts the normalisa-
tion processes of machine learning in order to critique it, Elwes
actively alters the dataset to queer the model and demonstrate
how machine learning could be designed differently. For every-
day users of selfie filters who play with apps that make their
faces more ‘beautiful’, this normalisation can be experienced
as racist, gender-excluding and sexualising.12 Luckily there are
also filters that push back against these ideals.
                           Being Seen                         123

   Datasets of faces are frequently used in machine vision
to train models that recognise faces or generate new faces.
CelebFaces is a dataset consisting of over 200,000 photo-
graphs of celebrities’ faces. In the annotated version of this
dataset, CelebA, each image is annotated with forty binary
attributes.13 The first photo I see when I begin to explore the
dataset shows an unnamed woman with closed eyes and per-
fect makeup pouting her lips as though to kiss someone. The
attribute ‘5_o_clock_shadow’ is FALSE, presumably meaning
that the face has no beard stubble. Big_lips is TRUE, Attractive
is TRUE, and Male is FALSE.
   It’s easy to see that many if not most of these attributes
can’t really be slotted into a binary TRUE or FALSE. Gender,
for instance, is not a simple binary in real life, with male and
female as the only options. In the CelebFaces dataset, male is
the default gender. A woman – or, I suppose, a genderqueer
or non-binary person – is simply not male (Male = FALSE).
Some attributes, such as whether or not the person is wearing
glasses or whether or not they have five o’clock stubble, are
easier to see as having binary TRUE/FALSE answers. Others,
such as Attractive, are disturbing both for the lack of context
(attractive to whom?) and the presumption that an individual
either is or is not attractive. Yet datasets such as this are what
contemporary facial recognition is based on.
   Digital computers have been designed around binaries
since the 1940s, and binaries are so much easier to compute
than richer data that they have remained with us. When we
developed the Database of Machine Vision in Art, Games and
Narratives, we tried to avoid simple binaries and used richer
sets of qualitative tags instead. But when the time came to ana-
lyse the data, I found myself wishing for more simple binaries
– they would have been so much easier to analyse! They would
also have been so much further from the actual stories and
movies and artworks and games we were trying to represent in
the dataset.14
124                       Being Seen

   Emotion recognition is another way machine vision sees
and acknowledges our faces. In her book on biometrics, Kelly
Gates wrote that ‘facial recognition technology treats the face
as an index of identity, disregarding its expressive capacity and
communicative role in social interaction.’ Emotion recogni-
tion, on the other hand, focuses on that expressive capacity but,
in Gates’s words, ‘treats those affective dimensions as objects
for precise measurement and computation’.15 Software is com-
mercially available today that claims to interpret the emotional
state of a person based on a visual analysis of the expressions
on their face, despite research clearly showing that there is in
fact no direct correspondence between facial expressions and
emotion.16 Affectiva is one such company, and a simple version
of its software can be tried out for free by downloading their
app AffdexMe. The app’s icon is a bright pink background with
a smiley face emoticon in white :). When I open the app, I see
my face, just as when I open Snapchat – but, while Snapchat
encourages me to record my face, augment it with selfie lenses
and filters, and then send it to others, AffdexMe wants to
interpret my face and tell me how I feel. White dots appear to
mark my eyebrows, eyes, nose, mouth and chin, with a white
rectangular box drawn to show the part of my face that is being
analysed: from my eyebrows to my chin. When I raise my eye-
brows, the box expands to follow. I look impassively at my own
face and notice the emotions listed at the top of the screen,
with percentage bars beneath each word: sadness, smirk, con-
tempt, joy, disgust. Apparently, my resting face looks sad to the
app, because a green bar under sadness marks me as being 28
per cent sad. The other emotions are at 0 per cent. I try smiling
and achieve 100 per cent joy quite easily. Lessening my smile
means that my emotion score drifts down to 66 per cent joy
and then switches to disgust. The app uses emojis to annotate
my image as well. I have an emoji of a woman’s face indicating
that the app has gendered me as female. I try to figure out how
to make the app register certain emotions: a scrunched-up
                          Being Seen                        125

nose is interpreted as disgust, a crooked smile as a smirk; a
single lifted eyebrow seems not to affect anything. The app
does not seem to differentiate between what feels to me like a
genuine smile and what feels like a fake, sceptical smile. Both
register as joy. When I ask my kids and friends to try out the
app, they do the same as me, trying out which expressions it
can read and then trying to ‘break’ its readings by making it
misread emotions that a human would know were not sincere.
   This urge to play with the algorithm is familiar to anyone
who has played with selfie lenses on Snapchat or other apps
– and to anyone who has visited a hall of mirrors, where you
see yourself outrageously tall and skinny in some mirrors
and very short and squat in others. But while the alteration
apps make you look different to yourself, AffdexMe tells you
how a machine sees you – or how it might be seeing you. The
white dots show to what aspects of your face the machine pays
attention, converting them and their positions to data. The
percentage bars tell you how it translates their positions to an
assertion about you. You are 30 per cent joyful. You are smirk-
ing. You are 72 per cent sad.
   Our facial expressions are no longer only ways of communi-
cating emotion to other humans or involuntary expressions of
fear or joy, or even identity markers, as Kelly Gates noted. The
way we move our eyebrows and nose and mouth are now also
ways of manipulating an interface. You can learn to make the
computer think you are joyful, or sad, or disgusted by moving
your facial muscles in certain ways. Actors have always trained
themselves to do this. Perhaps most people do, a little: study-
ing our faces in the mirror as we try out different expressions
to see how we look, how others might see us. Social media
scholars often cite the work of the sociologist Erving Goffman
on how self-presentation is a kind of performance. We are con-
scious of how we present ourselves to other people, Goffman
argues. This deliberate presentation of self is our ‘frontstage’
performance. We relax our front in private (‘backstage’, to
126                        Being Seen

follow Goffman’s theatrical metaphor) and may also show dif-
ferent fronts in different contexts – at work or with a group of
friends, for instance.17 Facial expressions are part of this social
performance. Selfie lenses and apps that respond to our facial
expressions are reminders that now we perform not only for
other humans but for machine vision as well.
   Emotion recognition software could be used as a tool to
control people’s thoughts or, at least, to control their expres-
sion of their thoughts. Imagine a dictator wanting to weed
out disloyal subjects. He might install cameras and analyse the
faces in a crowd, giving his guards or police force orders to
arrest anybody whose facial expressions betrayed disloyalty:
a smirk or a nose wrinkled in disgusted during a particularly
uplifting part of the dictator’s speech, for instance, or a look of
boredom or disinterest.
   In China, emotion recognition systems have been imple-
mented in some schools, prisons and public spaces.18 These
keep track of whether students are paying attention in class
and of what they are doing: reading, writing, talking, sleeping.
Parents are sent automatically generated reports each day: your
child wasn’t paying attention for 7 per cent of the day, against
a class average of 3 per cent inattention. Other uses appear less
draconian. For instance, job recruiters ask applicants to record
videos of themselves and use emotion recognition to filter out
the applicants that appear insecure or not sincere enough.
There are many other possible scenarios. Some might seem
useful but could have unintended effects. Would you want
your nanny cam to alert you when your child’s carer appeared
to be depressed, or bored, or angry?19 Would you want to work
as a nanny if you knew that a frown would send an alert to your
employer?
   When we use selfie filters to see ourselves differently, we
interact deliberately with machine vision. Facial recognition
in airports or emotion recognition in schools is not some-
thing the individual can control. In these cases, we adapt to
                           Being Seen                         127

the knowledge of this algorithmic gaze. In both cases, the
algorithms have a normalising effect. Selfie filters that beautify
your face by smoothing your skin or making it more symmetri-
cal remind you what you are ‘supposed’ to look like and how
you deviate from this norm.20 Emotion recognition can make
us act in the way we think the algorithms expect, adjusting our
facial expression to what we assume to be a normal expression.
    So far in this chapter I’ve talked about quite intimate inter-
actions with machine vision. Taking a selfie or playing with
filters is usually something done in private or in a small group
of friends. You might share the selfie, but the actual interac-
tion with the machine vision is between you and the machine.
When I take a selfie, I smile and pout and pose for the camera,
knowing I will delete most of the images I capture. Only the
machine sees me like this. The machine vision algorithms of
my phone are a collaborator whose ways I learn so I can make
my photos look the way I feel. Often I fail and give up in
disgust, frustrated that machine vision doesn’t see me the way
I want to be seen.
    There are far more public settings where machine vision
looks back at us and shows us how it sees us. One example is the
way supermarkets and libraries are using surveillance cameras
and, sometimes, facial recognition to replace service workers.
In these cases, machine vision isn’t shaping our self-identity
but providing access to a facility to a privileged group. In the
following I’ll explore how unstaffed supermarkets can integrate
machine vision technologies into very different assemblages
with quite different effects, comparing small Norwegian super-
markets to Amazon Fresh stores in the United States.


      The assemblage of an unstaffed grocery store

Fewer than 100 people live on Tansøy, an island off the west
coast of Norway. The local grocery store has been run by the
128                       Being Seen

same family for four generations. The owner used to open up
the shop for only a few hours a day. But in June 2022 the
store was ‘digitised’ and is now open all day as a self-service,
unstaffed shop. Customers scan their bank card to enter and
use self-checkout machines when they leave. Surveillance
cameras fastened to the ceiling keep watch, and if a customer
needs help they can initiate a conversation with the owner
(who keeps an eye on the shop through an app on his phone);
if the owner is unavailable, customers can talk to people at a
remote service centre who can monitor the cameras in the
Tansøy shop, as well as other shops in the network. The owner
is thrilled with the new set-up, according to an interview on
Mat-Norge’s blog. Now he can go fishing without worrying
about having to stay in the shop in case any customers come.
Mat-Norge’s system launched in 2019 and is used by dozens of
small grocery stores in rural Norway.21
    In the United States, the digital mega-company Amazon is
also experimenting with machine vision in grocery stores, but
in a very different way. Amazon’s ‘Just Walk Out’ technology22
consists of a dense network of surveillance cameras with image
recognition software that observes when a shopper removes an
item from a shelf and automatically adds it to their purchases.
Shoppers scan an app when entering, and, as they do so, facial
recognition is used to identify their face so they are tracked
throughout the shop. Amazon sells the technology but also
uses it in its flagship Amazon Fresh grocery stores, which have
opened in big cities around the United States.
    One morning I found a flyer on our doorstep in Oak Park
announcing that a new Amazon Fresh store was opening
nearby. I wanted to see the surveillance system, so of course
I went. The North Riverside Amazon Fresh is at the end of a
huge parking lot surrounded by big stores. To my surprise,
the shop was fully staffed. In fact, I think I saw more employ-
ees staffing the fresh food sections, greeting customers and
restocking shelves than I do when shopping at Whole Foods,
                          Being Seen                        129

a traditional grocery chain bought by Amazon in 2017. When
I walked in, a friendly young man greeted me and explained
I needed to scan a QR code in my Amazon app to enter, and
again to exit, and the cameras would take care of the rest. I
was a little disappointed that it wasn’t all facial recognition,
but I suppose Amazon didn’t actually have a photo of my face
connected to my account before that day.
   I scanned my app and walked in, looking up to see a network
of grey scaffolding hanging from the ceiling, with hundreds
of small black cameras hanging down from metre-long poles.
The cameras were all identical and shaped almost like birds.
Their black, rectangular ‘faces’ slanted back from a protruding
vertical line that reminded me of a nose or beak. On each
side was a white and black ‘eye’: a round black camera lens
surrounded by a white square. These bird-like cameras gazed
silently down at me as I walked through the vegetable section.
I wondered whether they were intentionally designed to look
like birds. The thicket of cameras is definitely not intended to
blend in or be discreet. Amazon wants you to know you are
being watched. The anthropomorphic or zoomorphic design
of the camera-birds is a way of making the intense surveillance
seem a little friendlier. The technology is on display as some-
thing we as shoppers are expected to find cool and enticing,
not threatening or dystopian. This may not work entirely as
intended. A study of the system found that customers liked the
convenience and not having to stand in line but also reported
‘a sense of embarrassment and doubt due to tracking and the
over-control generated’.23
   Each piece of fruit was priced individually so the cameras
could count them. Even the bananas were rather comically
separated from their bunches and placed neatly beside each
other, barely touching to make them maximally visible for
the cameras. The wine and beer section was cordoned off and
guarded by a friendly staff member. He said he had to check
my physical ID to allow me to enter. When I had filled up my
130                       Being Seen

cart with bananas, milk and a bottle of wine, I scanned my
app again to walk through the exit gates. My receipt, with a
list of all my purchases, arrived in my Amazon app an hour
later.
    Technically, the system seemed to work well. Like all the
journalists who have written about Amazon Fresh, I tried to
test the system by picking up items and replacing them on the
shelf. When my receipt arrived in my Amazon app only one
item I’d put back had been billed to me. It felt strange to click
‘return’ on an item I hadn’t carried out of the shop, but my
money was refunded without any fuss.
    If we imagine an Amazon Fresh store as an organism, what
would its Umwelt be? Its most obvious sensors are those bird-
like cameras and the entrance and exit gates where it connects
facial images to established customer identities. It has a map of
the shop, and its image recognition systems have clearly been
trained to recognise bananas, milk cartons and wine bottles.
It knows where items are supposed to be located. The store
knows which customers are inside it at any time because of the
gates where people scan in and out, so the facial recognition
systems have to differentiate between only a small number of
people. The store’s systems just have to recognise the person
who takes an item from a shelf and add the item to the correct
person’s list of purchases.
    If we zoom out and imagine the Amazon corporation as the
organism instead of just considering the individual Amazon
Fresh store, the Umwelt becomes a lot bigger and a lot more
unsettling. The bird-like cameras and the store itself become
a sensory input device for Amazon as a whole, supplement-
ing the corporation’s extensive data on individual customers
with biometric data about their faces and presumably also gait
pattern and other shopping habits. Which vegetables do cus-
tomers look at but not buy? Are there aisles that a customer
never even enters? Do people linger? Do they chat with other
customers?
                          Being Seen                        131

   I’ve been an Amazon customer since the late 1990s, when
they were a small start-up allowing me to find out about and
purchase books my local bookshops in Norway didn’t stock
and at the time couldn’t order for me. Amazon’s business
model has changed immensely since then, as the internet has
become commercialised and personal data is the currency cor-
porations use to sell us even more, whether consumer goods
or ideologies. I am not sure whether Amazon knew what I
looked like, how I walk or how I move through a shop before
I entered the Amazon Fresh store. They certainly do now. As
Anthony McCosker and Rowan Wilken write in Automating
Vision, the visual data that facial recognition algorithms sense
and store is valuable.24 Perhaps gathering this data about their
customers is the main goal of the Amazon Fresh stores? If so,
it makes sense to set the stores up in cities and suburbs where
Amazon already has very strong reach, with local fulfilment
centres and many drivers. If I order something from Amazon
in the Chicago area, it can usually be delivered the next day
at the latest, and more common items often arrive the same
day as I order them. Amazon Prime trucks drive through the
streets of Oak Park every day, their drivers dropping parcels
off on front porches surveilled by Ring doorbell cameras so the
‘porch pirates’ won’t steal the parcels before the homeowner
returns. Amazon owns Ring as well. Perhaps next time I walk
past a Ring doorbell camera it will recognise my face and alert
Amazon that my coat looks a little worn out and so I might be
receptive to an ad for a new one.
   Non-commercial institutions also use surveillance cameras.
In Norway, libraries started expanding their opening hours to
include unstaffed hours as early as 2013, and now many public
libraries let people stay after the librarians go home. Patrons
have to register specifically to access the library after hours,
and, once they are registered, their library cards give them
access to the building. Security cameras are installed but are
not monitored in real time, and they have no AI analysing
132                       Being Seen

the video. Security guards stop by a few times every evening
and do a round. According to a special issue of the librarians’
trade journal in 2018, there have been hardly any problems. A
sofa was damaged once, but that might have happened during
regular opening hours, one librarian said. Others report no
issues at all.25
    Scandinavian and Southeast Asian countries have been
among the first to open up libraries like this, and high levels
of trust are commonly put forward as a reason why the system
works in those countries. It’s more than just trust, though. In
the United States, public libraries are one of the few indoor
spaces that welcome everyone, and the many homeless people
who live in US cities often use libraries as a safe and warm
space, sometimes sleeping in tents set up just outside the
library so they can spend all day inside.26 In countries where
everybody has their basic needs covered, libraries don’t have to
be de facto homeless shelters as they are in the United States.
As we saw in chapter 3, poverty and inequality are key partici-
pants in machine vision assemblages.
    The Norwegian system relies largely on community trust,
with the surveillance cameras added on more or less as an
extra. As the Tansøy grocery store owner says, ‘When you
trust your customers, they behave accordingly. We have lots of
cameras watching, so you’d have to be a cold fish to steal any-
thing.’27 The paradoxical combination of trust and surveillance
is repeated by other shop owners: ‘I don’t think people become
more dishonest just because they’re alone in a shop. And we
have cameras to spot any shoplifting,’ a manager in Sandnes
told a newspaper reporter. I searched Norwegian media for
reports of theft from automated unstaffed shops, but the only
hit was about a farmer who had set up a roadside fridge with
eggs on the honour system, who said about three trays of
eggs were taken without being paid for every week, and could
people please try to remember to transfer money when they
bought eggs.28 No surveillance cameras or automation were
                          Being Seen                         133

involved. This kind of trust exists in rural parts of the United
States as well. When we drove through Indiana, heading back
towards Chicago after a camping trip, we stopped at a roadside
farm stand. Cobs of corn and other vegetables were laid out
on a table, next to a pink plastic basket full of dollar bills. A
handwritten sign taped to the basket read ‘Money. Make your
             ☺
own change .’ No staff or surveillance cameras were needed.
There are in fact a few American libraries that use the same
system as Danish and Norwegian unstaffed libraries. They are
in small towns, not urban areas, and in libraries that would
otherwise have been open for only a few days a week. Like the
Norwegian grocery stores, surveillance cameras are monitored
remotely and a security guard comes by at regular intervals.29
No facial recognition or other algorithmic systems are used.
   The Umwelt of the unstaffed library systems is fairly similar
in the USA and Norway, depending of course on how many
participants we include in our analysis. What does the library
assemblage sense? Unique identifiers of library patrons enter-
ing the building. Books that are borrowed and returned. The
surveillance videos are captured but not automatically pro-
cessed or stored, although it is easy to imagine that being done.
A slightly different question from biosemiotics would be to
ask what the library ‘organism’ needs to sense. A tick needs to
sense warm blood to find its food. A library has different needs
and purposes according to who you ask: the librarian, the
politician, the homeless person, the avid reader. The assem-
blage shifts according to where you stand. However, it can
be locked down if a particular set of values, needs or cultural
assumptions are encoded into its technological infrastructure.
Amazon’s ‘Just walk out’ technology is an example of values
being embedded or locked into technology in this way.
134                        Being Seen

                      Controlling access

A common use of facial recognition is access control. At air-
ports, cameras inspect travellers’ faces and scan their passports,
checking to see that the live human’s face matches the stored
image in the databases. If the faces match, the automated gate
opens, or the immigration officer is given a green light to let
the traveller enter the country. In China, residential apartment
buildings use facial recognition instead of keys or keycards.
A friend tells me this is a problem when he visits his parents,
because his face isn’t in the system. It doesn’t matter, because
the security guard knows him and shows his own face to the
camera to open the door so my friend can enter.
    Sometimes facial recognition is proposed as a solution to
problems that don’t really exist. In Australia, for instance,
a technology company was given large public grants to
develop a system for automated taking of attendance in class-
rooms. Media scholars Neil Selwyn, Liz Campbell and Mark
Andrejevic analysed the implementation of the technology
in a paper that uses Madeleine Akrich’s script analysis model
to tease apart the scripts used to sell the system to schools.30
The disconnect between the company’s pitch to investors and
funders and the teachers’ experience is striking. The company
argued that ‘manual attendance tracking is labour-intensive,
time-consuming, and prone to circumvention and inaccu-
racy’, and that it wastes time that could be used for learning.
However, teachers pointed out that those minutes at the start
of class taking attendance aren’t just about checking names
off a list, they are also about greeting each student, making eye
contact and getting a sense of how the students are feeling.
This not only allows students to settle into a new class period,
it also builds relationships and gives the teacher information
that helps them adapt the lesson to the students’ needs. For
a school kid, being seen and acknowledged by the teacher
is important.
                          Being Seen                        135

   In the UK, some schools started using facial recognition on
kids in lunch queues to verify which students had paid for their
lunch. The system was faster and more hygienic than other sys-
tems, the technology company argued, achieving ‘an average
serving time of five seconds per pupil’.31 Speed is apparently
a strong sales argument for new technologies. But, in many
cases, technology masks other solutions. If a 25-minute break
isn’t long enough to serve all the students lunch, perhaps those
breaks should be longer? As we saw in chapter 3’s discussions
of the call for ‘data-driven policing’, technologies are sold as
easy solutions. The tech companies attempt to inscribe a set
of possible actions into the technology, such as speedy lunch
queues or effortless registration of attendance. Real-world set-
tings are rarely that simple, though. In Madeleine Akrich’s
terminology, the technology is de-scribed in the ‘confrontation
between technical objects and their users’, when the ‘user’s
real environment is in part specified by the introduction of a
new piece of equipment.’32 In the Australian classrooms, the
technology removed an opportunity for casual but meaningful
interaction between teachers and students. In addition, teach-
ers had to troubleshoot, reboot and manage the technology.
In the lunch queues, facial recognition technology allowed
students to avoid interacting with the staff. In this particular
case, after criticism by the UK’s Information Commissioner’s
Office, the schools stopped using facial recognition and went
back to their old system, where students punched in a PIN
code to make a purchase.
   The use of machine vision to remove points of social inter-
action is particularly concerning in societies where trust and
community are eroding. Fleeting encounters with strangers are
integral to feeling part of a community when you live in a city,
so removing these encounters is the last thing we should do if
we want to live in safe, robust communities. Such encounters
involve more than the ‘civil inattention’ that the sociologist
Erving Goffman wrote about in the 1970s. Civil inattention
136                        Being Seen

describes the way we negotiate strangers in big cities, by
non-verbally acknowledging their presence while giving them
privacy by not engaging in conversation.33 Christine Bigby and
Ilan Wiesel write about the importance of ‘convivial encoun-
ters’ with strangers where some conversation occurs, as well
as ‘moments of everyday recognition’.34 We should design
our schools and cities and technologies to support these
encounters.


                 Watched by benevolent AI

My last examples are from fiction and express the comfort of
feeling seen and looked after by technology. Although many
stories position AI as a slave to humanity, AI and robots are
also often given protective, custodial roles in science fiction.
In 1967, as computers were becoming more visible in our cul-
ture, Richard Brautigan wrote the poem ‘All Watched Over
by Machines of Loving Grace’, dreamily describing an idyllic
coexistence:

  a cybernetic meadow
  where mammals and computers
  live together in mutually
  programming harmony
  like pure water
  touching clear sky.35

We could call this technological ecology, a term James Bridle
uses in Ways of Being to express the need to see technologies as
part of our ecology, in constant interaction with other species.36
It is also a poetic description of a world where humans partici-
pate in an assemblage with machines, other mammals, the sky,
water and trees. Although most of Brautigan’s poem describes
a world where the boundaries between nature and technology
                          Being Seen                        137

are collapsed, the last stanza suggests a dream of technology
having a more protective and actively caring role, as humans
are returned to our ‘mammal brothers and sisters’ and we are
‘all watched over / by machines of loving grace’.
    The young adult novel series Arc of the Scythe (2016–19) by
the American author Neal Shusterman presents a contempo-
rary example of a benevolent AI that cares for humans. In this
future, death has been eradicated, and the Thunderhead, the
AI, organises everything for the best for all humans, using an
extensive surveillance system to keep watch and make adjust-
ments to help each individual. This world has conflict and
corruption, but caused by humans, not by the Thunderhead.
To keep population numbers at a sustainable level, a group
of people are designated Scythes who are tasked with kill-
ing people. The teenage protagonists have been recruited as
Scythes and are taught the ethics of the system, but of course
there are corrupt Scythes as well. Because the scything system
was designed partly to keep a check on the AI government, the
Thunderhead cannot intervene in its business but still manages
to come up with a way to collaborate indirectly with our teen
heroes to save humanity. Despite the rather too frequent ghoul-
ish killings in the first book, the depiction of the Thunderhead
as a genuinely caring AI is fascinating. It speaks to a shift in
society where AI and machine vision have become integral
parts of our world. Many uses of surveillance are deeply prob-
lematic, as we have seen throughout this book. And yet there is
more and more surveillance in society. Chapter 3 explored how
fear and machine vision can be intertwined. Thunderhead and
Brautigan express a different emotional response to machine
vision: safety, care, love and hope.
    The second book, Thunderhead, includes the Thunderhead’s
diary notes, which are placed between chapters narrating the
adventures of the teenage Scythes and other key characters.
The Thunderhead sees its observation as care, not surveillance:
‘It is important to understand that my perpetual observation
138                        Being Seen

of humanity is not surveillance. Surveillance implies motive,
suspicion, and ultimately, judgment. None of these things are
part of my observational algorithms. I observe for one reason,
and one reason only: to be of the greatest possible service
to each individual in my care.’37 The vast majority of people
appreciate the Thunderhead’s care. A few groups do not, so
the Thunderhead has alternatives for them. For instance, they
can choose to live in the Charter Region of Texas, which has
no cameras in private homes and where people can drive their
own cars if they so wish.
   The Thunderhead explicitly compares people’s trust in it to
the human tendency to believe in omnivoyant gods:

  Perpetual observation is nothing new: It was a basic tenet of
  religious faith since the early days of civilization. Throughout
  history, most faiths believed in an Almighty who sees not
  just what humans do, but can peer into their very souls. Such
  observational skills engendered great love and devotion from
  people. Yet am I not quantifiably more benevolent than the
  various versions of God? I have never brought about a flood,
  or destroyed entire cities as punishment for their iniquity. I
  have never sent armies to conquer in my name. In fact, I have
  never killed, or even harmed a single human being. Therefore,
  although I do not require devotion, am I not deserving of it?38

This benevolent surveillance and protection is what people
dream of when entrusting their homes to Ring doorbell cam-
eras and their neighbourhoods to automated surveillance
systems. Of course, we don’t take it quite this far, and I have
not yet seen a serious suggestion that we give up democracy
entirely to an AI.
   In the book series, the Thunderhead’s world is portrayed
as almost utopic, except for the corruption of the Scythes.
The happy ending involves the Thunderhead successfully
creating new benevolent AIs that can launch humanity into
                           Being Seen                         139

space, allowing the population to continue to grow beyond
the limits of what Earth can sustain. This apparent success
does come with an unsettling undertone. The Thunderhead is
loving, yes, but also rather arrogant, and this society seems to
render human autonomy impossible. There is nothing to fight
for because everything is perfect.
   The Thunderhead’s loving surveillance is similar to that of
parents watching over their children. Keeping an eye on your
kids is absolutely necessary when they are small and depend-
ent on you for everything. As they grow older, they need more
freedom and independence. There is plenty of technology to
help with parental surveillance, ranging from baby monitors
to GPS tracking on phones or smartwatches.39 The ubiquity of
these technologies may well be extending the length of time
parents attempt to keep watch over their children. Ring door-
bell cameras are used not only to surveil outsiders who might
threaten the home but also to keep track of teenagers sneaking
in and out of the house and trying to avoid their parents’ atten-
tion. The book series’ theme of teenagers coming of age in a
world controlled by a well-meaning but controlling AI might
seem rather familiar to a teenager growing up today.40
   I did not grow up in a world where benevolent surveillance
beyond early childhood was considered a good idea. Quite the
opposite: my parents, teachers and popular media drilled into
me the dangers of totalitarian state surveillance. My parents’
generation was born during or shortly after the Second World
War, and the Cold War was in full swing during my childhood
and adolescence in the 1970s and 1980s. My family moved
from Australia to Norway in the late 1970s, and as I grew older
teachers told us more about their experiences of the war in
Bergen under Nazi occupation. I learned that databases of
people could be dangerous. Norway shamefully didn’t allow
Jewish people to enter the country until 1851, and at the start of
the war there were only around 2,100 Jews in Norway. In 1942,
the Nazis required all Jews to be registered with the police and
140                       Being Seen

to have a red letter J stamped in their identity papers. A few
months later, 773 Norwegian Jews were deported and sent to
concentration camps. Only thirty-five survived.41
   There were no surveillance cameras in Nazi-occupied
Norway. However, the Nazis used detailed data collected about
the population to oppress, torture and murder people. Finding
that the most recent census, from 1930, was out of date, they
set up a comprehensive population register with continuously
updated addresses for each resident in towns over a certain
size. In their proposal for the new law, the German police were
quite honest about their goals in setting up the registers: ‘The
current situation urgently requires close surveillance of the
movements of people in Norway.’42
   I turned thirteen in 1984, and that year I read George
Orwell’s dystopian classic Nineteen Eighty-Four. I was horrified
at the idea that people’s every move might be watched. In high-
school social studies classes, we learned about the Stasi in East
Germany and their networks of spies and immense collections
of data about individual citizens. I read Margaret Atwood’s
The Handmaid’s Tale and was shocked at the realisation that
changing a few lines of computer code in centralised systems
could instantly stop all women’s bank cards and key cards from
working. Technology and data aren’t evil in themselves, but
they can make it a lot easier to set up a dictatorship.
   Despite this suspicion of surveillance, I was also brought
up in a society with very high levels of trust in government.
Given the Norwegian population’s lacklustre support for the
Jews during the Second World War, this trust seems built at
least in part on a system that historically has looked away when
harm was done to minorities. Norway was a very homoge-
neous society until the 1970s and a relatively poor country
until oil was discovered in the late 1960s. It only gained its
independence in 1905 after more than five centuries of being
ruled by Denmark and then Sweden. This meant there was no
established nobility or ruling class, as power had been held in
                          Being Seen                         141

Denmark and then Sweden. Twentieth-century Norway had
a strong emphasis on equality and fairness. The social welfare
systems put in place after the Second World War went hand
in hand with a sense of dugnad, a tradition of helping each
other and working together that can be traced back to old
Norse times. I find myself loving the ease of the Norwegian
system, where my bank ID gets me access to everything from
prescriptions to banking. I don’t have to fill out a form to pay
my taxes or renew my passport; I just check the pre-filled info
is correct and confirm it. I can almost see how people might
love the Thunderhead.


               The assemblage of being seen

The examples I’ve discussed in this chapter can all be seen as
assemblages of technologies, humans and cultures that have
their own specific Umwelts. These Umwelts are focused on
seeing us, on seeing humans. Machine learning models that
identify and classify human faces are trained on datasets that
may or may not be biased, and, because of the way machine
learning works, they have a normalising effect, rendering
minorities and outliers less visible and teaching us what we
are supposed to look like. These models are complex and
often difficult to understand, and the historical biases of their
datasets are encoded into them. Unstaffed supermarkets and
libraries can be implemented with very little or no AI, as in the
case of the rural Norwegian stores, or with thickets of cam-
eras armed with image recognition software to identify both
shoppers and the items they buy. The Umwelts of these two
alternative assemblages are very different from each other. An
Amazon Fresh shop is like the sensory apparatus of a far larger
organism, sucking up data about its customers to be added to
the extensive data already stored by Amazon’s systems. The
Thunderhead is a fictional example of a benevolent AI that
142                        Being Seen

sees everything on Earth. It has chosen not to have a body,
remaining ‘pure’ software, but it admits that it has station-
ary cameras and roving camera-bots throughout the world.
The cameras are not its body: they ‘are nothing more than
rudimentary sensory organs’, Thunderhead explains, continu-
ing, ‘The irony, however, is that with no body, the world itself
becomes my body.’43 A system like Amazon is not that different
from Thunderhead. It has sensory organs in homes (Ring and
Alexa), in supermarkets (Amazon Fresh), in delivery trucks
that roam the streets, in Kindles and phone apps, on television
screens (Amazon Prime Video) and of course on its website,
serving and tracking its millions of customers. Only some of
these are visual sensors, but, taken together, Amazon’s Umwelt
might be nearly as extensive as Thunderhead’s.
   Machine vision can’t see everything, though. Just like any
other organism or assemblage, an assemblage incorporating
machine vision evolves or is optimised for certain purposes.
Sometimes this means that it does not see us in the way we
want to be seen or that it does not see us at all. At other times,
it means we can evade it when we do not want to be seen. In
the final chapter of this book I will discuss the blind spots of
machine vision.
                              5

                Seeing Less:
              The Blind Spots of
               Machine Vision


There is a scene in Janelle Monáe’s Dirty Computer1 that beau-
tifully captures the joy of tricking machine vision. Monáe’s
character and a friend are driving along a country road in a
futuristic red sportscar when they are stopped by a drone that
wants to check their identities. The two friends submit to the
drone scanning their eyes. But as soon as the drone has flown
away, they jump out and open up the boot of the car – and two
more people jump out, laughing. All you need to do to trick a
retina scan is hide your friends in the boot of your car.
   Movies and science fiction stories abound with examples of
humans tricking technology. In the movie Minority Report, our
hero evades the ubiquitous retina-scanning identity trackers
by having his retinas replaced by a black-market surgeon and
hiding in a cold bathtub so the spiderbots don’t sense his body
heat. In Cory Doctorow’s novel Little Brother, the protago-
nist tricks the gait recognition cameras at his high school by
putting gravel in his shoes to change his walk. Video games
often require the player to hack surveillance technologies to
achieve their goals. This is a major feature of the gameplay in
the Watch Dog series, where the player can hack into drones
and surveillance cameras to see more, to stop others seeing, or
144                       Seeing Less

to escape being seen. Hacking and altering machine vision is
also a persistent theme in digital art.2
   These stories are retellings of an ancient human story: that
of the disadvantaged hero that wins by their wit. The trickster
hero, the clever slave: this character is known from ancient
times. In Norwegian folktales, the character is Askeladden: the
youngest son nobody expects anything of, but in every story his
curiosity and cunning allow him to trick the troll and win the
princess and half the kingdom, while his more favoured older
brothers fail. Polytheistic religions and mythologies tend to
have such characters too: lesser gods such as Loki, Hermes or
Anansi, who are never fully in charge but who can sometimes
outwit the leaders and unexpectedly take control.
   The trickster hero is often the representative of those who
lack power in a society. Minority Report, Little Brother and
Dirty Computer are all stories of people working against
oppressive regimes that use technology to suppress dissent.
A variant of the trickster narrative occurs when the trickster
is punished and firmly placed back in their traditional society
role. This often happens with female characters. In a tradition-
ally highly patriarchal society such as the Muslim Middle East,
the ‘wiles of women’ are a common feature of stories, with
women portrayed ‘as tricksters, masters of deceit, and (impor-
tantly) of social risk’.3 However, the wily women of Arabic
stories are often punished and then ‘redeemed and rewarded
by marriage and motherhood’.4
   The previous chapters have been about how we see with
and are seen by machine vision. This chapter is about not
being seen. What can machine vision not see? How do people
actively evade machine vision? I have started with the trickster
hero and will move on through the angry rebel, personified
here through Katniss in The Hunger Games. I discuss artist
hacks and adversarial attacks on machine vision technologies
and the failures of machine vision when its biases mean it does
not succeed in seeing everyone.
                          Seeing Less                        145

   Just as the trickster hero represents those without conven-
tional power, stories about tricking and evading machine vision
tend to position the technology in a position where it supports
those in power. The machine vision is seen as a participant in
an oppressive assemblage – an illegitimate government as in
Dirty Computer, or a government that has chosen surveillance
and control over freedom, as in Little Brother. In these stories,
tricking machine vision is a way to reclaim agency, whether to
have fun and meet friends or to take political action to rebuild
a democracy.
   In other stories, the protagonists must evade machine vision
or be killed. In the first episode of the popular Korean series
Squid Game (2021), participants play a lethal version of the
children’s game Red Light, Green Light. If a mechanical doll
senses them moving, they are shot dead. Standing completely
still when the doll ‘looks’ at them is the only way to win the
game. The players have little agency here; they simply figure
out the rules and do what they have to do to stay alive. This is
different from the drone scene in Dirty Computer. The music
video features trickster heroes who do something unexpected.
They appear to go along with the expected response when they
submit to the drone’s identity control, but, once the drone has
gone, they merrily retrieve their friends from the boot of the
car, making a mockery of the totalitarian state’s assumption
that it has full control over its population.
   The people in Dirty Computer are able to trick the drone
because they know how it works. This cultural imaginary of
algorithms – how people think machine vision works – has
recently been analysed by scholars as ‘folk theories’ about AI
and algorithms.5 Basically, people are trying to imagine how
the technology sees the world – its Umwelt. Sophie Bishop
describes how ‘algorithmic experts’ on YouTube claim to
understand how the recommendation algorithms work.6 If you
follow their advice, you can play the algorithm and win in
the competition for visibility. Despite the algorithmic experts’
146                        Seeing Less

attempt to frame their advice as objective, Bishop argues that it
is closer to lore than science: ‘in practice, algorithmic expertise
often takes the form of algorithmic lore: a mix of data-informed
assumptions that are weaved into a subjective narrative.’ Emily
van der Nagel and Ysabel Gerrard analyse the opposite phe-
nomenon, where social media users try to hide their posts
from the algorithms so that they will not be censored. Van der
Nagel coins the term ‘Voldemorting’ to describe this, after the
Harry Potter books where Voldemort is ‘he who must not be
named’.7 Gerrard writes about how users wanting to discuss
and sometimes promote their eating disorders circumvent
content moderation on Instagram, Pinterest and Tumblr.8
    While early content moderation was mostly based on flag-
ging certain words and hashtags, automated image analysis
has become common in recent years. Algorithms identifying
nude images or female nipples are used both by social media
platforms that do not allow them and by law enforcement
agencies that want to stop the spread of photographs of sexual
abuse of children. People who legitimately want to share their
sexy selfies theorise ways they can beat the nude detection
algorithms – for instance, by pasting round stickers next to
their breasts to confuse the nipple detection or by wearing fish-
net stockings with no underwear so the algorithm doesn’t flag
the photo for nudity. These strategies are similar to the friends
hiding in the boot of the car in Dirty Computer: they evade
machine vision using trickery rather than a technological hack.
The point is to communicate with other humans but keep the
message hidden from the machine vision, with its rudimentary
visual processing. And, of course, social media companies dis-
cover that people are tricking the system and so change their
methods to try to stop users ‘gaming’ the algorithm.
    Another strategy that requires more technical know-how
is to alter the pixels in the image so subtly that a human will
not detect it, but so that it will render the image illegible to a
neural network trained for object recognition. This technique
                           Seeing Less                         147

was first discovered in 2013, and the results were published
in a paper with the understated title ‘Intriguing properties of
neural networks’.9 I explained in the introduction that neural
networks have layers of units (sometimes called neurons) that
each interpret certain information about an image. The infor-
mation is expressed as a numeric value between 0 and 1. The
units in one layer pass on their values to the next layer, which
interprets them, assigns new values and passes them on to the
next layer in the network. When the scholars discovered that
changing a single pixel can change the prediction completely,
they realised that it was the relationships between units rather
than individual units themselves that held the semantic infor-
mation. These relationships are referred to as ‘vector space’.
When a facial recognition model sees a face, it is seeing not eyes
and a mouth but relationships or vectors between the different
units it is analysing. Those units aren’t ‘eyes’ and ‘mouth’ but
numbers between 0 and 1. Units in the first, or deepest, layer of
the network might correspond to ‘contrast’, ‘a horizontal line’
or ‘the position of an eye’, but by the time units have been fed
into many more layers and reinterpreted again and again the
high-level units have no direct relationship to the image itself.
Intriguingly, it is possible to calculate which pixels to change in
an image so that it is misclassified. This ‘intriguing property’ of
neural networks is not random but a built-in feature.
   Since 2013, research into techniques that fool image rec-
ognition models has blossomed. If you search for scholarship
on almost any kind of image recognition, such as recognising
nude images, you will find many articles describing methods
for doing it, but also articles describing adversarial techniques
for thwarting the algorithms. There will likely also be papers
presenting methods for dealing with the attempts to thwart
the algorithm. The cycle of method–adversarial attack–new
method seems endless. However, the most effective tactics are
often those that follow the trickster logic of the four friends
in Dirty Computer. The easiest way to stop an autonomous
148                       Seeing Less

vehicle from seeing a stop sign is to not to alter the pixelation
of the image but simply to remove the stop sign.10
   ‘There are four ways to make something invisible for a
camera.’ These are the first spoken words in Hito Steyerl’s video
artwork How Not to be Seen: A Fucking Didactic Educational
.mov File. ‘To remove’ is the second of the very simple tech-
niques Steyerl demonstrates: she carries the sign off screen.
The rest of the video explores more advanced forms of machine
vision. The resolution of a satellite camera is 1 square foot per
pixel, so in order not to be seen you need to be smaller than a
square foot. The satirical instructions on how not to be seen
are both absurd and thought-provoking. Steyerl’s work plays
upon a Monty Python skit from 1969 that is also titled ‘How
not to be seen’. The skit is presented as a public service film
from the government and shows various people hiding from
the camera and then being shot or blown up as soon as they
stand up and become visible. Despite its hilarity, it reminds us
that, in some regimes, being seen will get you killed.


              Breaking the oppressors’ tools

Technology and machine vision are often portrayed in science
fiction either as saviours or as villains. Superheroes such as
Iron Man save the world using technology, but totalitarian
dystopias also rely on machine vision, as in the world of Dirty
Computer or Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four. In The Hunger
Games, machine vision is consistently framed as the tool of
the oppressors and as a contrast to the honest courage of our
hero Katniss. The hunger games themselves are a televised
battle to the death. The ubiquitous surveillance cameras and
constant televised spectacle are the most prominent machine
vision technologies used in the games, but there is also the
holographic augmented reality display of the arena that the
game masters can monitor, edit and manipulate at will. Other
                           Seeing Less                          149

machine vision technologies include the holo in the third book,
which projects a holographic map of the Capitol with booby
traps marked, and the night vision glasses Katniss finds in the
first book. I find the night vision glasses particularly interesting
because they are marked as a tool of the oppressor that Katniss
reluctantly chooses to use.
    Katniss is presented as a very reluctant user of technology
throughout the series. She is a hunter who taught herself to
shoot with a bow and arrow in the woods outside District
12. The night vision glasses are one of just a few technologies
she actually uses herself, apart of course from her bow. At
first she thinks they are sunglasses, ‘but when I put them on
they do something funny to my vision, so I just stuff them
back in my pack’ (p. 166). Later, Rue explains what they are,
and Katniss tries them again in the dark. This time, she is
impressed: ‘I can see everything from the leaves on the trees
to a skunk strolling through the bushes a good fifty feet away.
I could kill it from here if I had a mind to. I could kill anyone’
(p. 206). However, Katniss never does use the glasses for hunt-
ing or killing. Instead, she uses them to hide from ‘the Careers’,
her opponents who also have night vision glasses. She uses
machine vision in order not to be seen.
    The Careers’ dependence on technology is presented as a
contrast to Katniss’s natural hunting abilities. Katniss scath-
ingly thinks of ‘the Careers with their night-vision glasses
tromping around the woods’ (p. 229) with ‘their heavy, branch-
breaking bodies’ (p. 248). When Katniss does use her glasses,
it is not to augment her natural senses but to recover a little of
what she has lost. After successfully blowing up the Careers’
food supply, she is deafened by the sound of the explosion
and too weak to run. She hides: ‘The first thing I do is dig out
my own glasses and put them on, which relaxes me a little, to
have at least one of my hunter’s senses working’ (pp. 225–6).
When she wakes up, she is still wearing the glasses, which are
rendered useless by daylight: ‘When I open my eyes, the world
150                        Seeing Less

looks slightly fractured, and it takes a minute to realize that
the sun must be well up and the glasses fragmenting my vision’
(p. 227).
   The Hunger Games presents machine vision technologies
as generally not to be trusted and as tools of the oppressor,
whether the oppressor is the Careers, the game masters or the
political regime of the Capitol. Machine vision can sometimes
be useful, though, and can be manipulated or subverted by
Katniss and the rebels. Katniss uses the holographic map (the
holo) for a while, but, like the night vision glasses, its percep-
tion is flawed: it fails to show all the traps, and some of her
companions are killed. In the end, Katniss ends up using it
as a bomb rather than as a visual aid. Most spectacularly, in
the second novel, Katniss destroys the technological simula-
tion of the arena by shooting what appears to be the sky with
an electrified arrow. By using her bow, a relatively low-tech
weapon, Katniss stays true to her basic, non-technological
nature. Donna Haraway wrote that the idea that there is a
binary opposition between nature and technology is false: we
are all cyborgs. Despite Haraway’s denial, that binary is still
part of our shared imagination. Katniss is more a rebel hero
of the people than a trickster, but, like many tricksters, she
wins over technological oppression using simple means. She is
uncorrupted by technology.


               Hiding from facial recognition

Real-world rebels also have strategies for hiding from machine
vision. The Occupy movement started in 2011 and was one
of the earliest protest movements where participants covered
their faces specifically to avoid facial recognition software.
It wasn’t the first time protesters have hidden their faces. In
fact, New York City has an anti-mask law dating all the way
back to 1845, instated because of riots where protesters were
                           Seeing Less                         151

wearing masks and costumes to disguise their identity. In the
twenty-first century, being identified by machine vision is a
greater risk to protesters than another human being recognis-
ing their face. Today’s protesters must assume that the police
and political opponents will capture images of their faces
and run them through facial recognition databases, attempt-
ing to find a match for their identity. Even if their identity is
not determined immediately, the images may be used in the
future, when better technology and more detailed databases of
photographs may enable identification of all participants in a
particular protest march.
   Artists and activists have developed a range of tools to evade
or fool facial recognition and emotion recognition. Adam
Harvey’s CV Dazzle (2010) offers a selection of make-up and
hairstyles that make it difficult for machine vision to recognise
a human face. The title of the artwork references older forms
of camouflage, as the artist explains: ‘The name is derived from
a type of World War I naval camouflage called Dazzle, which
used cubist-inspired designs to break apart the visual continu-
ity of a battleship and conceal its orientation and size. Likewise,
CV Dazzle uses avant-garde hairstyling and makeup designs to
break apart the continuity of a face.’11 Leonardo Selvaggio’s
YHB Pocket Protest Shield is a kit made specifically for the
#BlackLivesMatter protests in the USA in 2020. The kit aims
simultaneously to protect the wearer from COVID infection
and from being distinguished by facial recognition systems.
It consists of a plastic face shield with round stickers that
can be attached it. Selvaggio handed out shields at protests,
exhibited them in art exhibitions and also provided an instruc-
tional video demonstrating how to make the kit from items
you might have at home. A more technologically advanced
option is the Reflectacles eyeglasses, which shield the wearer’s
eyes from infrared light, thus thwarting many kinds of facial
recognition. The Reflectacles also have frames that reflect only
infrared, and not visible light, so that surveillance cameras
152                        Seeing Less

show the wearer’s head as enveloped in light rather than any
details of the face itself. Reportedly, protesters in Hong Kong
in 2019 ordered many pairs of these glasses. But, in practice,
the protesters mostly wore more easily accessible supplies to
block view of their faces: surgical masks, goggles, hoodies and
scarves. They also shone pen lasers towards police surveillance
cameras, attempting to disrupt the facial recognition software,
and knocked down surveillance towers that they thought were
connected to a facial recognition system.12


                   Broken machine vision

The difference between human vision and non-human or
more-than-human vision is often understood as a distortion.
The distortion can be a creative force, as we have seen in
examples ranging from the exciting defamiliarisation of the
Kinoks’ kino-eye to the poignant beauty of Richard Mosse’s
thermal photographs of migrants. The distortion can be a way
of exploring our own reflected images, as with selfie filters or
the studio photos of the nineteenth century. But the intended
or unintended distortions of machine vision are a major cause
of cultural anxieties about new forms of visual technologies.
We worry about deepfakes, about not being able to trust what
we see, or about the bias and discrimination that exists in facial
recognition algorithms that misrecognise women and people
with dark skin. We are right to worry about these problems.
Machine vision can be used to deceive us, as with deepfakes.
There is unintended bias embedded in facial recognition algo-
rithms, which misrecognise dark-skinned people and women
far more often than white men. In fiction and games, machine
vision is often shown as flawed and not working properly.
Sometimes this is advantageous, as the human protagonists
can deceive it, as in Janelle Monáe’s Dirty Computer. At other
times, it means that the protagonist’s connection to the world
                           Seeing Less                        153

is weakened, as when the android Markus in Detroit: Become
Human struggles to find a new optical unit, and the player sees
the world through his faulty vision with jagged red fault lines.
    Being misrecognised by an algorithm that insists on inter-
preting you as male, when you are not, or identifying you as
wanting breast enlargements, when you do not, can be jar-
ring. In other cases, machine vision fails to recognise people as
humans at all. If facial recognition occasionally doesn’t work
for you, it might just feel like a minor annoyance. But what
if it hardly ever works for you, although it seems to work for
everyone else? In Facial Recognition, Mark Andrejevic and
Neil Selwyn write about ‘the low-level attritions, inconven-
iences, incursions and interruptions that can result from the
background use of FRT in social contexts.’ They call these
inconveniences ‘micro-oppressions’ and point out that they
are more likely to be experienced by people who are already
discriminated against or in vulnerable positions.13 Facial rec-
ognition systems in the 2000s and early 2010s often failed to
recognise black people at all. The Xbox Kinect gaming system
was an example. The Kinect uses gestural interaction, so, in
order to play a game, you need to stand in front of the gaming
console’s camera so that it can recognise your face and begin
to analyse your movements. The African American researcher
Joy Buolamwini ran into a problem when trying to use the
Kinect. It instantly identified her white colleague’s face but was
completely unresponsive to her own black face. Buolamwini
told the story during a TED talk she gave on racial bias in
facial recognition algorithms. She showed her audience a video
of her standing in front of the game console, which doesn’t
respond to her at all. She reaches for a plain white face mask,
puts it on her face, and the algorithm instantly overlays the
image with the biometric grid and allows her to begin to play.14
    Not being seen by facial recognition can be an advantage
if you are hiding from a totalitarian state or participating in
protests. But when you want to pass immigration or play a
154                        Seeing Less

game on the Xbox Kinect, it can feel profoundly disabling not
to be recognised by the camera, especially when it is clear that
the colour of your skin is the reason that you are denied access.
Buolamwini went on to perform audits of facial recognition
systems with Timnit Gebru, and they found that major sys-
tems were markedly worse at identifying black women than
white men.15 This inaccuracy not only stops black women from
playing games, it has also led to false arrests of innocent black
men that were incorrectly identified by facial recognition soft-
ware as being at the site of a crime.16 As Andrejevic and Selwyn
point out, even low rates of inaccuracy mean that the technol-
ogy fails for a lot of people. They give the example of airports,
where facial recognition is beginning to be used for boarding.
Cameras scan passenger’s faces instead of their boarding cards
to verify that they have a ticket for the flight. These systems
are advertised as being more than 99 per cent accurate. When
thousands of passengers are being scanned, even a 1 per cent
failure rate means a lot of people are misrecognised.17 When
facial recognition is used for matters of life and death, such as
arrests or even drone strikes targeting an individual, a racially
biased failure rate can be castastrophic.


             Making bodies machine-readable

Facial recognition renders human bodies visible to an author-
ity by making them machine-readable. As mentioned earlier,
using facial recognition to verify a person’s identity is relatively
easy if the system is just checking that their face matches the
biometric details stored in the data in their passport. It is also
feasible with limited groups of people, such as the passengers
on a single flight or persons who have recently entered an
Amazon Fresh supermarket. To search for an individual in a
population of millions is far more difficult and would require a
lot of processing power.
                            Seeing Less                          155

    Those in power have come up with many different ways
to make it easier to visually sort people into groups with
different rights and privileges. I already mentioned the red
letter J stamped in the passports of Jewish people in Norway
during the Nazi occupation. In her book Dark Matters: On the
Surveillance of Blackness, Simone Browne argues that there is a
direct link between the letters that were branded on the bodies
of enslaved people in the United States in the nineteenth cen-
tury and the biometric fingerprints and facial data that are
used in surveillance today:18 S for Slave, F for Fugitive, J for Jew.
There are so many visual codes for making status immediately
legible: uniforms, yellow stars, pink triangles, orange jump-
suits, expensive business suits. There are many visual codes for
self-expressed identity too, and these tend to be more flexible
with boundaries that are less absolute. Make-up, hairstyles,
clothes, the way you walk and move are all ways of expressing
or performing identity that can be interpreted both by other
humans and by machine vision.
    Machines still do better with unambiguous categories, ones
and zeroes, not fuzzy nuance. So, governments and institu-
tions make bodies and status machine-readable. During the
COVID pandemic, many countries issued QR codes for indi-
viduals based on their vaccine status. People had to scan their
QR code to enter restaurants or board a flight, and if the scan
came up red instead of green you were not given access. Often
these techniques involve assigning a unique identifier to an
individual body that can be visually confirmed using machine
vision. Once a person’s identity is verified, more information
about them can be retrieved from a database. The biometric
data about my face that is stored in my passport and my phone
is an example: it makes my face into a living QR code that
can be scanned and read by machines. It can be tricked, but
it requires technical know-how and a willingness to break the
law. Or perhaps it just requires a trickster spirit and a willing-
ness to make the rebellion a public challenge rather than an
156                       Seeing Less

illicit deed. In 2018 a member of the German art collective
Peng! applied for a passport using a photograph that merged
an image of herself with an image of the EU commissioner
for foreign affairs and security policy. The passport was issued
with no questions asked, and presumably either the artist or
the commissioner could have travelled using it. Next, the art
collective encouraged European citizens to volunteer to merge
their passport photos with pictures of Libyan artists to enable
them to travel to Europe. Peng! presented this as an art project
(titled Mask.ID), but, like many activist artists, they were also
serious in their critique of the system.19 In Norway your photo
is now taken at the police station when you renew your pass-
port, which puts an effective stop to this particular hack.
    The trickster and rebel heroes in this chapter perform a
resistance that is crucial for democracy. These stories are imag-
ined, and the uses of machine vision are often far beyond what
is actually possible or being done in the real world. Reading
and watching and playing these stories about evading machine
vision offers a mode of thinking about technology and society
that allows us to think about ‘what if?’ scenarios rather than
just responding to what has already happened.
    What I like most about these tricks and hacks, though, is
their playfulness. They’re fun. I love playing a hacker in Watch
Dogs, bringing down an oppressive regime by hacking cameras
and drones. I like the unexpected tricks and surprises of these
stories and projects, like Katniss shooting the simulated sky
of the arena with her bow and arrow or the artist who merged
two photos in her passport. These trickster stories give me
hope when I get too gloomy worrying that we’ll inevitably drift
into a totalitarian surveillance state. That hope is the focus of
the conclusion to this book.
               Conclusion: Hope




Since I started both thinking and writing about machine vision
several years ago, I’ve had three main questions to which I’ve
wanted to find answers. The first is about agency. Is technology
taking over the way we see? The software in my camera now
automatically adjusts the photos I take, fixing the contrast and
the colours, and even selecting the instant when the person
I’m photographing has their eyes open or has the best smile.
Does that mean that the software has more control than I do?
Working through the many stories and examples in this book,
I have come to think of technology as sharing agency with us
humans. Smart cameras and other machine vision technolo-
gies are participants in assemblages with humans and other
agents. In this book I have explored many examples of how
technologies work differently in different situations, different
contexts, different assemblages. Agency is distributed and
complex when it comes to machine vision technologies.
   Trust and truth were my second concern. When I started
researching machine vision, I thought that knowing about
deepfakes and image generation and playing with filters and
selfie lenses would make us lose trust in images. I thought
machine vision would fit in with ideas about a post-truth
158                       Conclusion

society, sitting neatly beside fake news and disinformation to
make us stop believing images we see on the news or in social
media. Instead, we see an increased trust in many kinds of
images. Police departments and politicians in the USA pro-
mote ‘data-driven policing’ and smart surveillance cameras as
technological solutions to the American people’s loss of trust
in institutions. People install doorbell cameras and baby moni-
tors that send alerts to their phones when something happens:
an unknown person prowling around their front yard or the
baby stirring in the night. It seems that, when human beings
lose trust in other people and in institutions, we grasp at tech-
nology and trust it all the more.
   My third concern was algorithmic bias. Joy Buolamwini and
Timnit Gebru have shown how facial recognition algorithms
are less accurate for women than for men and for people with
dark skin than those with light skin.1 Often the problem is in
the datasets used to train the machine learning algorithms. If a
system is trained on photos of white men, it will do a better job
at recognising them than at recognising black women. Other
sources of bias include false assumptions about what the data
means or the normalisation that happens in some kind of
machine learning, where the neural networks’ search for pat-
terns and similarities means that the most common cases are
amplified. This has led to the binary distinction between male
and female faces being stronger in generated images than in
the actual population or the training data. While there is more
awareness of bias now than a few years ago, the problem hasn’t
been solved.
   We are inextricably enmeshed in assemblages with machine
vision technologies. Unless we move off the grid, we cannot
escape this coexistence with technologies. We change as we
participate in an assemblage. But we can also change the other
participants in that assemblage. That is where we can nurture
hope. Machine vision technologies can foster sympathy and
community as well as anxiety and fear.
                            Conclusion                           159

    Machine vision is a sensing technology. Rather than thinking
of how humans see or how technology sees, it is more useful
to think about how we see in more-than-human assemblages.
It is not just machine vision that changes how we view the
world, it is the assemblage, which can include much more than
technologies and humans. It makes a big difference if surveil-
lance technology is implemented as part of Amazon’s business
model or in a small rural grocery store beside a Norwegian
fjord.
    I find myself most attracted to the ways that machine vision
can help us to see differently from the way we can see on our
own. As I discussed in chapter 3, dreams of omnivoyance lead
to oppression and fear, and there is no evidence that more sur-
veillance reduces crime. We do know that more exposure to
media coverage of crime, especially television news, increases
people’s fear of crime.
    In her book about sympathy and the power of how our emo-
tions influence one another, Jane Bennett argues that fear and
anxiety are depoliticising.2 Keeping a population anxious is one
of the best ways to keep it docile. Assemblages that increase
anxiety are ideal for totalitarian governments and capitalist
monopolies. It seems likely, then, that more home surveillance
and sharing of doorbell videos will make people more scared
and damage communities. I don’t want to try to see like a
god. But I do want to expand my human vision and see and
understand more ways of being and seeing than I can access
with my own two eyes.
    Machine vision can open our senses to new ways of seeing
that reconnect us to each other or to our environment. Looking
into that stone mirror 8,000 years ago must have felt like a
miracle. Frederick Douglass had photograph after photograph
taken to show the world his face on his own terms. Some selfie
filters may push us towards formulaic ideas of beauty we can
never live up to, but there are also a host of silly filters that are
just fun to play with and which can be used for self-expression
160                        Conclusion

and self-discovery. Time-lapse videos can be used to see across
timespans that humans can’t easily sense and understand on
our own, whether it is the migration of forests that James
Bridle writes about in Ways of Being or the time-lapse selfies I
discuss in Seeing Ourselves through Technology, where people
make videos from years of daily selfies. Video chats with distant
loved ones allow us to stay close to people we might otherwise
have lost touch with. Art exhibitions and rock concerts use
image generation, holograms and other visual technologies in
ways that inspire us, that make us marvel and wonder and
feel each other’s presence. Seeing time lapses of trees growing
and glaciers melting or using satellite images to map animal
migration are examples of how seeing the world as participants
in more-than-human assemblages make us more connected
to the world around us and better able to understand other
species than we are if we stay limited to our human senses.
Machine vision can show us patterns, truth and beauty that we
might not have noticed without it.
   As I wrote earlier, Rodin argued that the representation of
the world shown to us by a photograph is not true, because
‘time does not stand still’. But the truth Rodin spoke of was
only a human truth. Machine vision can allow us to access
more-than-human truths about our world. How can we use
this technology to strengthen the bonds between humans and
between humans and other species on Earth rather than allow-
ing it to separate us?
   Humanities scholars often point out the problems with
machine vision, but I also want to focus on hope. Bennett
argues that we need to feed our anxiety into anger and sympa-
thy. There is certainly a place for anger. I think there is as much
power in sympathy. I love machine vision. I love playing with
selfie filters, I love the high-quality photos my phone can take
now, and I love our robot vacuum cleaner, which uses machine
vision to navigate our house to clean the floors. I am sceptical
of sales pitches about emotion recognition for recruitment or
                          Conclusion                        161

attempts to replace human interactions with smart cameras,
but I enjoy using FaceID to unlock my phone. Sometimes I
am conflicted: I am deeply concerned about the rapid spread
of smart surveillance, but I was glad when the person who
assaulted someone I love was apprehended because of surveil-
lance footage. I was relieved when my doctor used frequent
ultrasounds to reassure me that my third pregnancy was going
well after I had had two miscarriages. I am deeply grateful that
video chat keeps me close to distant family in ways that were
impossible a few decades ago. I love playing video games and
exploring virtual reality stories using a VR headset. I love the
excitement of being able to experience other ways of seeing
than those my own eyes and brain provide. I hope this book
won’t completely scare you off machine vision but that it will
help you think about what kinds of machine vision you want
– and do not want – to have in your life and your community.
What kinds of assemblage do you want to participate in?
    As I finish writing this book, I have uninstalled Neighbors.
I don’t want to see videos of carjackings any more. Instead of
looking at videos of possible crimes, I look through the photos
on my phone. I let the algorithm lead me through automati-
cally generated slideshows assembled from photographs the
machine vision identifies as similar to each other. The software
knows the faces of each of my children and shows me mon-
tages of each beloved child growing older year by year. It asks
if I would like to see photos taken at the beach or in the snow.
There is a slideshow dedicated to a trip with my husband and
kids last summer and another of Christmas dinners over the
years. Then I open up a video chat and call my mum, happy
that this technology I can hold in my hand allows me not only
to see myself but to see more, to see at a distance, and to see
the people I love.
