        INTRODUCTION TO NEURAL
                                 8
              NETWORKS



            Neural networks are the heart of deep
           learning. In Chapter 9, we’ll take a deep
          dive into what we’ll call traditional neural net-
       works. However, before we do that, we’ll intro-
duce the anatomy of a neural network, followed by a
quick example.
     Specifically, we’ll present the components of a fully connected feed-
forward neural network. Visually, you can imagine the network as shown in
Figure 8-1. We’ll refer to this figure often in this chapter and the next. Your
mission, should you choose to accept it, is to commit this figure to memory
to save wear and tear on the book by flipping back to it repeatedly.
                                W1           W2          W3

                                                              Node
                           x0

                   Input                                         y     Output
                           x1
                                                              Weight

                                       a1           a2

                                        Hidden layers
                   Figure 8-1: A sample neural network

                       After discussing the structure and parts of a neural network, we’ll ex-
                   plore training our example network to classify irises. From this initial exper-
                   iment, Chapter 9 will lead us to gradient descent and the backpropagation
                   algorithm—the standard way that neural networks, including advanced deep
                   neural networks, are trained. This chapter is intended as a warm-up. The
                   heavy lifting starts in Chapter 9.


      Anatomy of a Neural Network
                   A neural network is a graph. In computer science, a graph is a series of nodes,
                   universally drawn as circles, connected by edges (short line segments). This
                   abstraction is useful for representing many different kinds of relationships:
                   roads between cities, who knows whom on social media, the structure of the
                   internet, or a series of basic computational units that can be used to approxi-
                   mate any mathematical function.
                         The last example is, of course, deliberate. Neural networks are universal
                   function approximators. They use a graph structure to represent a series of
                   computational steps mapping an input feature vector to an output value, typ-
                   ically interpreted as a probability. Neural networks are built in layers. Con-
                   ceptually, they act from left to right, mapping an input feature vector to the
                   output(s) by passing values along the edges to the nodes. Note, the nodes
                   of a neural network are often referred to as neurons. We’ll see why shortly.
                   The nodes calculate new values based on their inputs. The new values are
                   then passed to the next layer of nodes and so on until the output nodes are
                   reached. In Figure 8-1, there’s an input layer on the left, a hidden layer to
                   its right, another hidden layer right of that, and a single node in the out-
                   put layer.
                         The previous section included the phrase fully connected feedforward neu-
                   ral network without much explanation. Let’s break it down. The fully con-
                   nected part means every node of a layer has its output sent to every node of
                   the next layer. The feedforward part means that information passes from left




170    Chapter 8
to right through the network without being sent back to a previous layer;
there is no feedback, no looping, in the network structure. This leaves only
the neural network part.


The Neuron
Personally, I have a love/hate relationship with the phrase neural network.
The phrase itself comes from the fact that in a very crude approximation,
the basic unit of the network resembles a neuron in a brain. Consider
Figure 8-2, which we’ll describe in detail shortly.


  x0
              w0

                          h                a = h(w0x0 + w1x1 + b0)


  x1          w1


Figure 8-2: A single neural network node

     Recalling that our visualization of a network always moves from left
to right, we see that the node (the circle) accepts input from the left, and
has a single output on the right. Here there are two inputs, but it might
be hundreds.
     Many inputs mapped to a single output echo how a neuron in the brain
works: structures called dendrites accept input from many other neurons,
and the single axon is the output. I love this analogy because it leads to a
cool way of talking and thinking about the networks. But I hate the analogy
because these artificial neurons are, operationally, quite different from real
ones, and the analogy quickly falls apart. There is an anatomical similarity
to actual neurons, but they’re not the same, and it leads to confusion on the
part of those who are not familiar with machine learning, causing some to
believe that computer scientists are truly building artificial brains or that the
networks think. The meaning of the word think is hard to pin down, but to
me it doesn’t apply to what a neural network does.
     Returning now to Figure 8-2, we see two squares on the left, a bunch
of lines, a circle, a line on the right, and a bunch of labels with subscripts.
Let’s sort this out. If we understand Figure 8-2, we’ll be well on our way to
understanding neural networks. Later, we’ll see an implementation of our
visual model in code and be surprised to learn how simple it can be.
     Everything in Figure 8-2 focuses on the circle. This is the actual node. In
reality, it implements a mathematical function called the activation function,
which calculates the output of the node, a single number. The two squares
are the inputs to the node. This node accepts features from an input feature
vector; we use squares to differentiate from circles, but the input might just


                                                           Introduction to Neural Networks   171
                  as well have come from another group of circular nodes in a previous net-
                  work layer.
                       Each input is a number, a single scalar value, which we’re calling x0 and
                  x1 . These inputs move to the node along the two line segments labeled w0
                  and w1 . These line segments represent weights, the strength of the connec-
                  tion. Computationally, the inputs (x0 , x1 ) are multiplied by the weights (w0 ,
                  w1 ), summed, and given to the activation function of the node. Here we’re
                  calling the activation function h, a fairly common thing to call it.
                       The value of the activation function is the output of the node. Here
                  we’re calling this output a. The inputs, multiplied by the weights, are added
                  together and given to the activation function to produce an output value.
                  We have yet to mention the b0 value, which is also added in and passed to
                  the activation function. This is the bias term. It’s an offset used to adjust the
                  input range to make it suitable for the activation function. In Figure 8-2, we
                  added a zero subscript. There is a bias value for each node in each layer, so
                  the subscript here implies that this node is the first node in the layer. (Re-
                  member computer people always count from zero, not one.)
                       This is all that a neural network node does: a neural network node ac-
                  cepts multiple inputs, x0 , x1 , . . ., multiplies each by a weight value, w0 , w1 , . . .,
                  sums these products along with the bias term, b, and passes this sum to the
                  activation function, h, to produce a single scalar output value, a:

                                                a = h(w0 x0 + w1 x1 + · · · + b)

                       That’s it. Get a bunch of nodes together, link them appropriately, figure
                  out how to train them to set the weights and biases, and you have a useful
                  neural network. As you’ll see in the next chapter, training a neural network
                  is no easy feat. But once trained, they’re simple to use: feed it a feature vec-
                  tor, and out comes a classification.
                       As an aside, we’ve been calling these graphs neural networks, and will
                  continue to do so, sometimes using the abbreviation NN. If you read other
                  books or papers, you might see them called artificial neural networks (ANNs)
                  or even multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs), as in the sklearn MLPClassifier class
                  name. I recommend sticking with neural network, but that’s just me.


                  Activation Functions
                  Let’s talk about activation functions. The activation function for a node
                  takes a single scalar input, the sum of the inputs times the weights plus the
                  bias, and does something to it. In particular, we need the activation func-
                  tion to be nonlinear so that the model can learn complex functions. Math-
                  ematically, it’s easiest to see what a nonlinear function is by stating what a
                  linear function is and then saying that any mapping that is not linear is . . .
                  nonlinear.
                       A linear function, g, has output that is directly proportional to the input,
                  g(x) ∝ x, where ∝ means proportional to. Alternatively, the graph of a lin-
                  ear function is a straight line. Therefore, any function whose graph is not a
                  straight line is a nonlinear function.

172   Chapter 8
    For example, the function

                                   g(x) = 3x + 2

is a linear function because its graph is a straight line. A constant function
like g(x) = 1 is also linear. However, the function

                                    g(x) = x2 + 2

is a nonlinear function because the exponent of x is 2. Transcendental func-
tions are also nonlinear. Transcendental functions are functions like g(x) =
log x, or g(x) = ex , where e = 2.718... is the base of the natural logarithm.
Trigonometric functions like sine and cosine, their inverses, and functions like
tangent that are built from sine and cosine are also transcendental func-
tions. These functions are transcendental because you cannot form them
as finite combinations of elementary algebra operations. They are nonlinear
because their graphs are not straight lines.
     The network needs nonlinear activation functions; otherwise, it will be
able to learn only linear mappings, and linear mappings are not sufficient to
make the networks generally useful. Consider a trivial network of two nodes,
each with one input. This means there’s one weight and one bias value per
node, and the output of the first node is the input of the second. If we set
h(x) = 5x – 3, a linear function, then for input x the network computes output
a1 to be

                  a1 = h(w1 a0 + b1 )


                     = h(w1 h(w0 x + b0 ) + b1 )


                     = h(w1 (5(w0 x + b0 ) – 3) + b1 )


                     = h(w1 (5w0 x + 5b0 – 3) + b1 )


                     = h(5w1 w0 x + 5w1 b0 – 3w1 + b1 )


                     = 5(5w1 w0 x + 5w1 b0 – 3w1 + b1 ) – 3


                     = (25w1 w0 )x + (25w1 b0 – 15w1 + 5b1 – 3)


                     = Wx + B

for W = 25w1 w0 and B = 25w1 b0 – 15w1 + 5b1 – 3, which is also a linear
function, another line with slope W and intercept B since neither W nor B
depend on x. Therefore, a neural network with linear activation functions

                                                          Introduction to Neural Networks   173
                  would learn only a linear model since the composition of linear functions
                  is also linear. It’s precisely this limitation of linear activation functions that
                  caused the first neural network “winter” in the 1970s: research into neural
                  networks was effectively abandoned because they were thought to be too
                  simple to learn complex functions.
                       Okay, so we want nonlinear activation functions. Which ones? There are
                  an infinite number of possibilities. In practice, a few have risen to the top
                  because of their proven usefulness or nice properties or both. Traditional
                  neural networks used either sigmoid activation functions or hyperbolic tan-
                  gents. A sigmoid is
                                                                  1
                                                        σ(x) =
                                                               1 + e–x

                      and the hyperbolic tangent is

                                                         ex – e–x e2x – 1
                                             tanh(x) =           =
                                                         ex + e–x e2x + 1

                  Plots of both of these functions are in Figure 8-3, with the sigmoid on the
                  top and the hyperbolic tangent on the bottom.
                      The first thing to notice is that both of these functions have roughly the
                  same “S” shape. The sigmoid runs from 0 as you go further left along the
                  x-axis to 1 as you go to the right. At 0, the function value is 0.5. The hyper-
                  bolic tangent does the same but goes from –1 to +1 and is 0 at x = 0.
                      More recently, the sigmoid and hyperbolic tangent have been replaced
                  by the rectified linear unit, or ReLU for short. The ReLU is simple, and has
                  convenient properties for neural networks. Even though the word linear is in
                  the name, the ReLU is a nonlinear function—its graph is not a straight line.
                  When we discuss backpropagation training of neural networks in Chapter 9,
                  we’ll learn why this change has happened.




174   Chapter 8
         1.0




         0.8




         0.6
 σ(𝔁)



         0.4




         0.2




         0.0
            –6      –4          –2            0            2                   4                 6
                                              𝔁
           1.0




           0.5
anh(𝔁)




         –0.0




         –0.5




         –1.0
               –6    –4           –2           0            2                    4               6
                                               𝔁
Figure 8-3: A sigmoid function (top) and a hyperbolic tangent function (bottom). Note that
the y-axis scales are not the same.




                                                               Introduction to Neural Networks   175
                            The ReLU is as follows and is shown in Figure 8-4.
                                                                 {
                                                                  0, if x < 0
                                          ReLU(x) = max(0, x) =
                                                                  x, otherwise


                            5




                            4




                            3
                  relu(𝔁)




                            2




                            1




                            0
                                 –4            –2                0                2          4
                                                                 𝔁
                  Figure 8-4: The rectified linear activation function, ReLU(x) = max(0,x)

                       ReLU is called rectified because it removes the negative values and re-
                  places them with 0. In truth, the machine learning community uses several
                  different versions of this function, but all are essentially replacing negative
                  values with a constant or some other value. The piecewise nature of the
                  ReLU is what makes it nonlinear and, therefore, suitable for use as a neu-
                  ral network activation function. It’s also computationally simple, far faster to
                  calculate than either the sigmoid or the hyperbolic tangent. This is because
                  the latter functions use ex , which, in computer terms, means a call to the exp
                  function. This function is typically implemented as a sum of terms of a series
                  expansion, translating into dozens of floating-point operations in place of
                  the single if statement necessary to implement a ReLU. Small savings like
                  this add up in an extensive network with potentially thousands of nodes.


                  Architecture of a Network
                  We’ve discussed nodes and how they work, and hinted that nodes are con-
                  nected to form networks. Let’s look more closely at how nodes are connec-
                  ted, the architecture of the network.


176   Chapter 8
     Standard neural networks like the ones we are working with in this chap-
ter are built in layers, as you saw in Figure 8-1. We don’t need to do this, but
as we’ll see, this buys us some computational simplicity and greatly simpli-
fies training. A feedforward network has an input layer, one or more hidden
layers, and an output layer. The input layer is simply the feature vector, and
the output layer is the prediction (probability). If the network is for a multi-
class problem, the output layer might have more than one node, with each
node representing the model’s prediction for each of the possible classes
of inputs.
     The hidden layers are made of nodes, and the nodes of layer i accept
as input the output of the nodes of layer i – 1 and pass their outputs to the
inputs of the nodes of layer i + 1. The connections between the layers are
typically fully connected, meaning every output of every node of layer i – 1
is used as an input to every node of layer i, hence fully connected. Again, we
don’t need to do this, but it simplifies the implementation.
     The number of hidden layers and the number of nodes in each hidden
layer define the architecture of the network. It has been proven that a sin-
gle hidden layer with enough nodes can learn any function mapping. This is
good because it means neural networks are applicable to machine learning
problems since, in the end, the model acts as a complex function mapping
inputs to output labels and probabilities. However, like many theoretical
results, this does not mean that it’s practical for a single layer network to
be used in all situations. As the number of nodes (and layers) in a network
grows, so, too, does the number of parameters to learn (weights and biases),
and therefore the amount of training data needed goes up as well. It’s the
curse of dimensionality again.
     Issues like these stymied neural networks for a second time in the 1980s.
Computers were too slow to train large networks, and, regardless, there was
usually too little data available to train the network anyway. Practitioners
knew that if both of these situations changed, then it would become possible
to train large networks that would be far more capable than the small net-
works of the time. Fortunately for the world, the situation changed in the
early 2000s.
     Selecting the proper neural network architecture has a huge impact on
whether or not your model will learn anything. This is where experience
and intuition come in. Selecting the right architecture is the dark art of
using neural networks. Let’s try to be more helpful by giving some (crude)
rules of thumb:
   •    If your input has definite spatial relationships, like the parts of an
        image, you might want to use a convolutional neural network in-
        stead (Chapter 12).
   •    Use no more than three hidden layers. Recall, in theory, one suffi-
        ciently large hidden layer is all that is needed, so use as few hidden
        layers as necessary. If the model learns with one hidden layer, then
        add a second to see if that improves things.



                                                      Introduction to Neural Networks   177
                      •   The number of nodes in the first hidden layer should match or (ide-
                          ally) exceed the number of input vector features.
                      •   Except for the first hidden layer (see previous rule), the number
                          of nodes per hidden layer should be the same as or some value be-
                          tween the number of nodes in the previous layer and the following
                          layer. If layer i – 1 has N nodes and layer i + 1 has M nodes, then layer
                          i might be good with N ≤ x ≤ M nodes.
                  The first rule says that a traditional neural network best applies to situa-
                  tions where your input does not have spatial relationships—that is, you have
                  a feature vector, not an image. Also, when your input dimension is small,
                  or when you do not have a lot of data, which makes it hard to train a larger
                  convolutional network, you should give a traditional network a try. If you do
                  think you are in a situation where a traditional neural network is called for,
                  start small, and grow it as long as performance improves.


                  Output Layers
                  The last layer of a neural network is the output layer. If the network is mod-
                  eling a continuous value, known as regression, a use case we’re ignoring in
                  this book, then the output layer is a node that doesn’t use an activation func-
                  tion; it simply reports the argument to h in Figure 8-2. Note that this is the
                  same as saying that the activation function is the identity function, h(x) = x.
                       Our neural networks are for classification; we want them to output a de-
                  cision value. If we have two classes labeled 0 and 1, we make the activation
                  function of the final node a sigmoid. This will output a value between 0 and
                  1 that we can interpret as a likelihood or probability that the input belongs
                  to class 1. We make our classification decision based on the output value
                  with a simple rule: if the activation value is less than 0.5, call the input class
                  0; otherwise, call it class 1. We’ll see in Chapter 11 how changing this thresh-
                  old of 0.5 can be used to tune a model’s performance for the task at hand.
                       If we have more than two classes, we need to take a different approach.
                  Instead of a single node in the output layer, we’ll have N output nodes, one
                  for each class, each one using the identity function for h. Then, we apply a
                  softmax operation to these N outputs and select the output with the largest
                  softmax value.
                       Let’s illustrate what we mean by softmax. Suppose we have a dataset
                  with four classes in it. What they represent doesn’t really matter; the net-
                  work doesn’t know what they represent, either. The classes are labeled 0, 1,
                  2, and 3. So, N = 4 means our network will have four output nodes, each one
                  using the identity function for h. This looks like Figure 8-5, where we have
                  also shown the softmax operation and the resulting output vector.




178   Chapter 8
                0



                1

                             softmax           [p0 , p1, p2, p3]

                2



                3
 n–1             n
Figure 8-5: The last hidden layer n-1 and output layer (n, nodes numbered)
for a neural network with four classes. The softmax operation is applied,
producing a four-element output vector, [p0 ,p1 ,p2 ,p3 ].

    We select the index of the largest value in this output vector as the class
label for the given input feature vector. The softmax operation ensures that
the elements of this vector sum to 1, so we can again be a bit sloppy and call
these values the probability of belonging to each of the four classes. That is
why we take only the largest value to decide the output class label.
    The softmax operation is straightforward: the probability for each of the
outputs is simply

                                            eai
                                      pi = ∑ aj
                                             je


where ai is the i-th output, and the denominator is the sum over all the out-
puts. For the example, i = 0, 1, 2, 3, and the index of the largest value will be
the class label assigned to the input.
    As an example, assume the output of the four last layer nodes is

                                        a0 = 0.2


                                        a1 = 1.3


                                        a2 = 0.8


                                        a3 = 2.1




                                                            Introduction to Neural Networks   179
                  Then calculate the softmax as follows:

                                     p0 = e0.2 /(e0.2 + e1.3 + e0.8 + e2.1 ) = 0.080


                                     p1 = e1.3 /(e0.2 + e1.3 + e0.8 + e2.1 ) = 0.240


                                     p2 = e0.8 /(e0.2 + e1.3 + e0.8 + e2.1 ) = 0.146


                                     p3 = e2.1 /(e0.2 + e1.3 + e0.8 + e2.1 ) = 0.534

                  Select class 3 because p3 is the largest. Note that the sum of the pi values is
                  1.0, as we would expect.
                       Two points should be mentioned here. In the preceding equations, we
                  used the sigmoid to calculate the output of the network. If we set the num-
                  ber of classes to 2 and calculate the softmax, we’ll get two output values: one
                  will be some p, and the other will be 1 – p. This is identical to the sigmoid
                  alone, selecting the probability of the input being of class 1.
                       The second point has to do with implementing the softmax. If the net-
                  work outputs, the a values, are large, then ea might be very large, which is
                  something the computer will not like. Precision will be lost, at least, or the
                  value might overflow and make the output meaningless. Numerically, if we
                  subtract the largest a value from all the others before calculating the soft-
                  max, we’ll take the exponential over smaller values that are less likely to over-
                  flow. Doing this for the preceding example gives new a values


                                                a′0 = 0.2 – 2.1 = –1.9


                                                a′1 = 1.3 – 2.1 = –0.8


                                                a′2 = 0.8 – 2.1 = –1.3


                                                a′3 = 2.1 – 2.1 = 0.0

                  where we subtract 2.1 because that is the largest a value. This leads to pre-
                  cisely the same p values we found before, but this time protected against
                  overflow in the case that any of the a values are too large.


                  Representing Weights and Biases
                  Before we move on to an example neural network, let’s revisit the weights
                  and biases and see that we can greatly simplify the implementation of a neu-
                  ral network by viewing it in terms of matrices and vectors.

180   Chapter 8
      Consider the mapping from an input feature vector of two elements
to the first hidden layer with three nodes (a1 in Figure 8-1). Let’s label the
edges between the two layers (the weights) as wij with i = 0, 1 for the inputs
x0 and x1 and j = 0, 1, 2 for the three hidden layer nodes numbered from top
to bottom of the figure. Additionally, we need three bias values that are not
shown in the figure, one for each hidden node. We’ll call these b0 , b1 , and
b2 , again, top to bottom.
      In order to calculate the outputs of the activation functions, h, for the
three hidden nodes, we need to find the following.

                               a0 = h(w00 x0 + w10 x1 + b0 )


                               a1 = h(w01 x0 + w11 x1 + b1 )


                               a2 = h(w02 x0 + w12 x1 + b2 )

But, remembering how matrix multiplication and vector addition work, we
see that this is exactly
                                       
                           w00 w10 [ ]    b0
                                      x
                  ⃗a = h w01 w11  0 + b1  = h(W⃗x + ⃗b)
                                      x1
                            w02 w12       b2


where ⃗a = (a0 , a1 , a2 ), ⃗x = (x0 , x1 ), ⃗b = (b0 , b1 , b2 ), and W is a 3 × 2 matrix
of weight values. In this case, the activation function, h, is given a vector of
input values and produces a vector of output values. This is simply applying
h to every element of W⃗x + ⃗b. For example, applying h to a vector ⃗x with three
elements is

                      h(⃗x) = h((x0 , x1 , x2 )) = (h(x0 ), h(x1 ), h(x2 ))

with h applied separately to each element of ⃗x.
     Since the NumPy Python module is designed to work with arrays, and
matrices and vectors are arrays, we arrive at the pleasant conclusion that the
weights and biases of a neural network can be stored in NumPy arrays and
we need only simple matrix operations (calls to np.dot) and addition to work
with a fully connected neural network. Note this is why we want to use fully
connected networks: their implementation is straightforward.
     To store the network of Figure 8-1, we need a weight matrix and bias vec-
tor between each layer, giving us three matrices and three vectors: a matrix
and vector each for the input to the first hidden layer, the first hidden layer
to the second, and the second hidden layer to the output. The weight matri-
ces are of dimensions 3 × 2, 2 × 3, and 1 × 2, respectively. The bias vectors
are of length 3, 2, and 1.



                                                                  Introduction to Neural Networks   181
      Implementing a Simple Neural Network
                     In this section, we’ll implement the sample neural network of Figure 8-1 and
                     train it on two features from the iris dataset. We’ll implement the network
                     from scratch but use sklearn to train it. The goal of this section is to see how
                     straightforward it is to implement a simple neural network. Hopefully, this
                     will clear some of the fog that might be hanging around from the discussion
                     of the previous sections.
                          The network of Figure 8-1 accepts an input feature vector with two fea-
                     tures. It has two hidden layers, one with three nodes and the other with two
                     nodes. It has one sigmoid output. The activation functions of the hidden
                     nodes are also sigmoids.


                     Building the Dataset
                     Before we look at the neural network code, let’s build the dataset we’ll train
                     against and see what it looks like. We know the iris dataset already, but for
                     this example, we’ll use only two classes and only two of the four features.
                     The code to build the train and test datasets is in Listing 8-1.

                     import numpy as np
                   ¶ d = np.load("iris_train_features_augmented.npy")
                     l = np.load("iris_train_labels_augmented.npy")
                     d1 = d[np.where(l==1)]
                     d2 = d[np.where(l==2)]
                   · a=len(d1)
                     b=len(d2)
                     x = np.zeros((a+b,2))
                     x[:a,:] = d1[:,2:]
                     x[a:,:] = d2[:,2:]
                   ¸ y = np.array([0]*a+[1]*b)
                     i = np.argsort(np.random.random(a+b))
                     x = x[i]
                     y = y[i]
                   ¹ np.save("iris2_train.npy", x)
                     np.save("iris2_train_labels.npy", y)
                   º d = np.load("iris_test_features_augmented.npy")
                     l = np.load("iris_test_labels_augmented.npy")
                     d1 = d[np.where(l==1)]
                     d2 = d[np.where(l==2)]
                     a=len(d1)
                     b=len(d2)
                     x = np.zeros((a+b,2))
                     x[:a,:] = d1[:,2:]
                     x[a:,:] = d2[:,2:]
                     y = np.array([0]*a+[1]*b)
                     i = np.argsort(np.random.random(a+b))
                     x = x[i]


182    Chapter 8
y = y[i]
np.save("iris2_test.npy", x)
np.save("iris2_test_labels.npy", y)

Listing 8-1: Building the simple example dataset. See nn_iris_dataset.py.

    This code is straightforward data munging. We start with the augmented
dataset and load the samples and labels ¶. We want only class 1 and class 2,
so we find the indices of those samples and pull them out. We’re keeping
only features 2 and 3 and put them in x ·. Next, we build the labels (y) ¸.
Note, we recode the class labels to 0 and 1. Finally, we scramble the order of
the samples and write the new dataset to disk ¹. Last of all, we repeat this
process to build the test samples º.
    Figure 8-6 shows the training set. We can plot it in this case because we
have only two features.

   2.6


   2.4


   2.2


   2.0


   1.8
𝔁1




   1.6


   1.4


   1.2


   1.0


   0.8
     2.5      3.0       3.5      4.0      4.5        5.0     5.5         6.0         6.5          7.0
                                                𝔁0
Figure 8-6: The training data for the two-class, two-feature iris dataset

    We immediately see that this dataset is not trivially separable. There is
no simple line we can draw that will correctly split the training set into two
groups, one all class 0 and the other all class 1. This makes things a little
more interesting.


Implementing the Neural Network
Let’s see how to implement the network of Figure 8-1 in Python using
NumPy. We’ll assume that it’s already trained, meaning we already know
all the weights and biases. The code is in Listing 8-2.

                                                                Introduction to Neural Networks    183
                    import numpy as np
                    import pickle
                    import sys

                    def sigmoid(x):
                        return 1.0 / (1.0 + np.exp(-x))

                    def evaluate(x, y, w):
                     ¶ w12,b1,w23,b2,w34,b3 = w
                        nc = nw = 0
                        prob = np.zeros(len(y))
                        for i in range(len(y)):
                            a1 = sigmoid(np.dot(x[i], w12) + b1)
                            a2 = sigmoid(np.dot(a1, w23) + b2)
                            prob[i] = sigmoid(np.dot(a2, w34) + b3)
                            z = 0 if prob[i] < 0.5 else 1
                         · if (z == y[i]):
                                nc += 1
                            else:
                                nw += 1
                        return [float(nc) / float(nc + nw), prob]

                  ¸ xtest = np.load("iris2_test.npy")
                    ytest = np.load("iris2_test_labels.npy")
                  ¹ weights = pickle.load(open("iris2_weights.pkl","rb"))
                    score, prob = evaluate(xtest, ytest, weights)
                    print()
                    for i in range(len(prob)):
                        print("%3d: actual: %d predict: %d prob: %0.7f" %
                        (i, ytest[i], 0 if (prob[i] < 0.5) else 1, prob[i]))
                    print("Score = %0.4f" % score)

                    Listing 8-2: Using the trained weights and biases to classify held-out test samples. See
                    nn_iris_evaluate.py.

                         Perhaps the first thing we should notice is how short the code is. The
                    evaluate function implements the network. We also need to define sigmoid
                    as NumPy does not have it natively. The main code loads the test samples
                    (xtest) and associated labels (ytest) ¸. These are the files generated by the
                    preceding code, so we know that xtest is of shape 23 × 2 because we have
                    23 test samples, and each has two features. Similarly, ytest is a vector of
                    23 labels.
                         When we train this network, we’ll store the weights and biases as a list
                    of NumPy arrays. The Python way to store a list on disk is via the pickle
                    module, so we use pickle to load the list from disk ¹. The list weights has
                    six elements representing the three weight matrices and three bias vectors
                    that define the network. These are the “magic” numbers that our training
                    has conditioned to the dataset. Finally, we call evaluate to run each of the

184   Chapter 8
test samples through the network. This function returns the score (accu-
racy) and the output probabilities for each sample (prob). The remainder
of the code displays the sample number, actual label, predicted label, and
associated output probability of being class 1. Finally, the score (accuracy)
is shown.
     The network is implemented in evaluate; let’s see how. First, pull the in-
dividual weight matrices and bias vectors from the supplied weight list ¶.
These are NumPy arrays: w12 is a 2 × 3 matrix mapping the two-element
input to the first hidden layer with three nodes, w23 is a 3 × 2 matrix map-
ping the first hidden layer to the second hidden layer, and w34 is a 2 × 1
matrix mapping the second hidden layer to the output. The bias vectors are
b1, three elements; b2, two elements; and b3, a single element (a scalar).
     Notice the weight matrices are not of the same shape as we previously
indicated they would be. They are transposes. This is because we’re multi-
plying vectors, which are treated as 1 × 2 matrices, by the weight matrices.
Because scalar multiplication is commutative, meaning ab = ba, we see that
we’re still calculating the same argument value for the activation function.
     Next, evaluate sets the number correct (nc) and number wrong (nw) coun-
ters to 0. These are for calculating the overall score across the entire test set.
Similarly, we define prob, a vector to hold the output probability value for
each of the test samples.
     The loop applies the entire network to each test sample. First, we map
the input vectors to the first hidden layer and calculate a1 , a vector of three
numbers, the activation for each of the three hidden nodes. We then take
these first hidden layer activations and calculate the second hidden layer
activations, a2 . This is a two-element vector as there are two nodes in the sec-
ond hidden layer. Next, we calculate the output value for the current input
vector and store it in the prob array. The class label, z, is assigned by check-
ing if the output value of the network is < 0.5 or not. Finally, we increment
the correct (nc) or incorrect (nw) counters based on the actual label for this
sample (y[i]) ·. When all samples have been passed through the network,
the overall accuracy is returned as the number of correctly classified samples
divided by the total number of samples.
     This is all well and good; we can implement a network and pass input
vectors through it to see how well it does. If the network had a third hidden
layer, we would pass the output of the second hidden layer (a2) through it
before calculating the final output value.


Training and Testing the Neural Network
The code in Listing 8-2 applies the trained model to the test data. To train
the model in the first place, we’ll use sklearn. The code to train the model is
in Listing 8-3.

import numpy as np
import pickle
from sklearn.neural_network import MLPClassifier



                                                       Introduction to Neural Networks   185
                    xtrain= np.load("iris2_train.npy")
                    ytrain= np.load("iris2_train_labels.npy")
                    xtest = np.load("iris2_test.npy")
                    ytest = np.load("iris2_test_labels.npy")

                  ¶ clf = MLPClassifier(
                         · hidden_layer_sizes=(3,2),
                         ¸ activation="logistic",
                            solver="adam", tol=1e-9,
                            max_iter=5000,
                            verbose=True)
                    clf.fit(xtrain, ytrain)
                    prob = clf.predict_proba(xtest)
                    score = clf.score(xtest, ytest)

                  ¹ w12 = clf.coefs_[0]
                    w23 = clf.coefs_[1]
                    w34 = clf.coefs_[2]
                    b1 = clf.intercepts_[0]
                    b2 = clf.intercepts_[1]
                    b3 = clf.intercepts_[2]
                    weights = [w12,b1,w23,b2,w34,b3]
                    pickle.dump(weights, open("iris2_weights.pkl","wb"))

                    print()
                    print("Test results:")
                    print(" Overall score: %0.7f" % score)
                    print()
                    for i in range(len(ytest)):
                        p = 0 if (prob[i,1] < 0.5) else 1
                        print("%03d: %d - %d, %0.7f" % (i, ytest[i], p, prob[i,1]))
                    print()

                    Listing 8-3: Using sklearn to train the iris neural network. See nn_iris_mlpclassifier.py.

                        First, we load the training and testing data from disk. These are the
                    same files we created previously. Then we set up the neural network object,
                    an instance of MLPClassifier ¶. The network has two hidden layers, the first
                    with three nodes and the second with two nodes ·. This matches the ar-
                    chitecture in Figure 8-1. The network is also using logistic layers ¸. This is
                    another name for a sigmoid layer. We train the model by calling fit just as
                    we did for other sklearn model types. Since we set verbose to True, we’ll get
                    output showing us the loss for each iteration.




186   Chapter 8
     Calling predict_proba gives us the output probabilities on the test data.
This method is also supported by most other sklearn models. This is the
model’s certainty as to the assigned output label. We then call score to calcu-
late the score over the test set as we have done before.
     We want to store the learned weights and biases so we can use them with
our test code. We can pull them directly from the trained model ¹. These
are packed into a list (weights) and dumped to a Python pickle file.
     The remaining code prints the results of running the sklearn trained
model against the held-out test data. For example, a particular run of this
code gives

Test results:
  Overall score: 1.0000000

000: 0 - 0, 0.0705069
001: 1 - 1, 0.8066224
002: 0 - 0, 0.0308244
003: 0 - 0, 0.0205917
004: 1 - 1, 0.9502825
005: 0 - 0, 0.0527558
006: 1 - 1, 0.9455174
007: 0 - 0, 0.0365360
008: 1 - 1, 0.9471218
009: 0 - 0, 0.0304762
010: 0 - 0, 0.0304762
011: 0 - 0, 0.0165365
012: 1 - 1, 0.9453844
013: 0 - 0, 0.0527558
014: 1 - 1, 0.9495079
015: 1 - 1, 0.9129983
016: 1 - 1, 0.8931552
017: 0 - 0, 0.1197567
018: 0 - 0, 0.0406094
019: 0 - 0, 0.0282220
020: 1 - 1, 0.9526721
021: 0 - 0, 0.1436263
022: 1 - 1, 0.9446458

indicating that the model was perfect against the small test dataset. The out-
put shows the sample number, the actual class label, the assigned class label,
and the output probability of being class 1. If we run the pickle file hold-
ing the sklearn network’s weights and biases through our evaluation code,
we see that the output probabilities are precisely the same as the preceding
code, indicating that our hand-generated neural network implementation is
working correctly.




                                                     Introduction to Neural Networks   187
      Summary
                   In this chapter, we discussed the anatomy of a neural network. We described
                   the architecture, the arrangement of nodes, and the connections between
                   them. We discussed the output layer nodes and the functions they compute.
                   We then saw that all the weights and biases could be conveniently repre-
                   sented by matrices and vectors. Finally, we presented a simple network for
                   classifying a subset of the iris data and showed how it could be trained and
                   evaluated.
                        Now that we have our feet wet, let’s move on and dive into the theory
                   behind neural networks.




188    Chapter 8
    TRAINING A NEURAL NETWORK
                                 9
              In this chapter, we’ll discuss how to train
             a neural network. We’ll look at the stan-
           dard approaches and tricks being used in
        the field today. There will be some math, some
hand-waving, and a whole host of new terms and con-
cepts. But you don’t need to follow the math at a deep
level: we’ll gloss over things as needed to get the main
point across.
     This chapter is perhaps the most challenging in the book, at least con-
ceptually. It certainly is mathematically. While it’s crucially important to
building intuition and understanding, sometimes we get impatient and like
to dive into things first to test the waters. Thanks to preexisting libraries, we
can do that here. If you want to play around with neural networks before
learning how they work, jump to Chapter 10 before coming back here to fill
in the theory. But do come back.
     It’s possible to learn to use powerful toolkits like sklearn and Keras with-
out understanding how they work. That approach should not satisfy anyone,
though the temptation is real. Understanding how these algorithms work is
well worth your time.
      A High-Level Overview
                   Let’s begin this chapter with an overview of the concepts we’ll discuss. Read
                   it, but don’t fret if the concepts are unclear. Instead, try to get a feel for the
                   overall process.
                        The first step in training a neural network is selecting intelligent initial
                   values for the weights and biases. We then use gradient descent to modify
                   these weights and biases so that we reduce the error over the training set.
                   We’ll use the average value of the loss function to measure the error, which
                   tells us how wrong the network currently is. We know if the network is right
                   or wrong because we have the expected output for each input sample in the
                   training set (the class label).
                        Gradient descent is an algorithm that requires gradients. For now, think
                   of gradients as measures of steepness. The larger the gradient, the steeper
                   the function is at that point. To use gradient descent to search for the small-
                   est value of the loss function, we need to be able to find gradients. For that,
                   we’ll use backpropagation. This is the fundamental algorithm of neural net-
                   works, the one that allows them to learn successfully. It gives us the gra-
                   dients we need by starting at the output of the network and moving back
                   through the network toward the input. Along the way, it calculates the gradi-
                   ent value for each weight and bias.
                        With the gradient values, we can use the gradient descent algorithm to
                   update the weights and biases so that the next time we pass the training sam-
                   ples through the network, the average of the loss function will be less than it
                   was before. In other words, our network will be less wrong. This is the goal
                   of training, and we hope it results in a network that has learned general fea-
                   tures of the data.
                        Learning general features of the dataset requires regularization. There
                   are many approaches to regularization, and we’ll discuss the main ones.
                   Without regularization, the training process is in danger of overfitting, and
                   we could end up with a network that doesn’t generalize. But with regulariza-
                   tion, we can be successful and get a useful model.
                        So, the following sections introduce gradient descent, backpropaga-
                   tion, loss functions, weight initialization, and, finally, regularization. These
                   are the main components of successful neural network training. We don’t
                   need to understand these in all their gory mathematical details; instead,
                   we need to understand them conceptually so we can build an intuitive ap-
                   proach to what it means to train a neural network. With this intuition, we’ll
                   be able to make meaningful use of the parameters that sklearn and Keras
                   give us for training.


      Gradient Descent
                   The standard way to train a neural network is to use gradient descent.
                        Let’s parse the phrase gradient descent. We already know what the word
                   descent means. It means to go down from somewhere higher up. What about
                   gradient? The short answer is that a gradient indicates how quickly some-
                   thing changes with respect to how fast something else changes. Measuring

190    Chapter 9
how much one thing changes as another changes is something we’re all fa-
miliar with. We all know about speed, which is how position changes as time
changes. We even say it in words: miles per hour or kilometers per hour.
    You’re probably already familiar with the gradient in another context.
Consider the equation of a line

                                        y = mx + b

where m is the slope and b is the y-axis intercept. The slope is how quickly
the line’s y position changes with each change in the x position. If we know
two points that are on the line, (x0 , y0 ) and (x1 , y1 ), then we can calculate the
slope as
                                            y0 – y1
                                       m=
                                            x0 – x1

which, in words, we might say as “y’s per x.” It’s a measure of how steep or
shallow the line is: its gradient. In mathematics, we often talk about a change
in a variable, and the notation for that is to put a ∆ (delta) in front. So, we
might write the slope of a line as

                                                 ∆y
                                         m=
                                                 ∆x
to drive home the point that the slope is the change in y for each change in
x. Fortunately for us, it turns out that not only do lines have a slope at each
point, but also most functions have a slope at each point. However, except
for straight lines, this slope changes from point to point. A picture will help
here. Consider Figure 9-1.

                A




                                             B




                                                                              D


                                                      C


Figure 9-1: A function with several tangent lines indicated
                                                              Training a Neural Network   191
                       The graph in Figure 9-1 is of a polynomial. Notice the lines drawn on
                  the figure that are just touching the function. These are tangent lines. And
                  as lines, they have a slope we can see in the plot. Now imagine moving one
                  of the lines over the function so that it continues to touch the function at
                  only one point; imagine how the slope of the line changes as it moves.
                       It turns out that how the slope changes over the function is itself a func-
                  tion, and it’s called the derivative. Given a function and x value, the deriva-
                  tive tells us the slope of the function at that point, x. The fact that functions
                  have derivatives is a fundamental insight of calculus, and of fundamental
                  importance to us.
                       The notion of a derivative is essential because for single variable func-
                  tions, the derivative at the point x is the gradient at x; it’s the direction in
                  which the function is changing. If we want to find the minimum of the
                  function, the x that gives us the smallest y, we want to move in the direction
                  opposite to the gradient as that will move us in the direction of the minimum.
                       The derivative is written in many different ways, but the way that echoes
                  the idea of the slope, how y changes for a change in x, is
                                                         dy
                                                         dx

                      We’ll return to this form next when discussing the backpropagation al-
                  gorithm. That’s it for the gradient; now let’s take a closer look at descent.


                  Finding Minimums
                  Since we want a model that makes few mistakes, we need to find the set of
                  parameters that lead to a small value for the loss function. In other words,
                  we need to find a minimum of the loss function.
                       Look again at Figure 9-1. The minimum is on the right, where tangent
                  line C is. We can see it’s the minimum, and notice that the gradient is 0
                  there. This tells us we’re at a minimum (or maximum). If we start at B, we
                  see that the slope of the tangent line is negative (down and to the right).
                  Therefore, we need to move to an x value in the positive direction because
                  this is opposite to the sign of the gradient. Doing this will take us closer to
                  the minimum at C. Similarly, if we start at D, the slope of the tangent line
                  is positive (up and to the right) meaning we need to move in the negative x
                  direction, again toward C, to move closer to the minimum. All of this hints
                  at an algorithm for finding the minimum of a function: pick a starting point
                  (an x value) and use the gradient to move to a lower point.
                       For simple functions of just x, like those of Figure 9-1, this approach will
                  work nicely, assuming we start in a good place like B or D. When we move
                  to more than one dimension, it turns out that this approach will still work
                  nicely provided we start in a good place with our initial guess.
                       Working still with Figure 9-1 and assuming we’re starting at B, we see
                  that the gradient tells us to move to the right, toward C. But how do we se-
                  lect the next x value to consider, to move us closer to C? This is the step size,



192   Chapter 9
and it tells us how big a jump we make from one x position to the next. Step
size is a parameter we have to choose, and in practice this value, called the
learning rate, is often fluid and gets smaller and smaller as we move, under
the assumption that as we move, we get closer and closer to the minimum
value and therefore need smaller and smaller steps.
     This is all well and good, even intuitive, but we have a small problem.
What if instead of starting at B or D, we start at A? The gradient at A is point-
ing us to the left, not the right. In this case, our simple algorithm will fail—it
will move us to the left, and we’ll never reach C. The figure shows only one
minimum, at C, but we can easily imagine a second minimum, say to the left
of A, that doesn’t go as low (doesn’t have as small a y value) as C. If we start
at A, we’ll move toward this minimum, and not the one at C. Our algorithm
will fall into a local minimum. Once in, our algorithm can’t get us out, and we
won’t be able to find the global minimum at C. We’ll see that this is a gen-
uine issue for neural networks, but one that for modern deep networks is,
almost magically, not much of an issue after all.
     So how does all of this help us train a neural network? The gradient tells
us how a small change in x changes y. If x is one of the parameters of our
network and y is the error given by the loss function, then the gradient tells
us how much a change in that parameter affects the overall error of the net-
work. Once we know that, we’re in a position to modify the parameter by an
amount based on the gradient, and we know that this will move us toward a
minimum error. When the error over the training set is at a minimum, we
can claim that the network has been trained.
     Let’s talk a bit more about the gradients and parameters. All of our dis-
cussion to this point, based on Figure 9-1, has been rather one-dimensional;
our functions are functions of x only. We talked about changing one thing,
the position along the x-axis, to see how it affects the y position. In reality,
we’re not working with just one dimension. Every weight and bias in our
network is a parameter, and the loss function value depends upon all of
them. For the simple network in Figure 8-1 alone, there are 20 parameters,
meaning that the loss function is a 20-dimensional function. Regardless, our
approach remains much the same: if we know the gradient for each param-
eter, we can still apply our algorithm in an attempt to locate a set of parame-
ters minimizing the loss.


Updating the Weights
We’ll talk about how to get gradient values in a bit, but for the time being
let’s assume we have them already. We’ll say that we have a set of numbers
that tells us how, given the current configuration of the network, a change
in any weight or bias value changes the loss. With that knowledge, we can
apply gradient descent: we adjust the weight or bias by some fraction of that
gradient value to move us, collectively, toward a minimum of the entire loss
function.




                                                          Training a Neural Network   193
                        Mathematically, we update each weight and bias using a simple rule:

                                                         w ← w – η∆w
                   Here w is one of the weights (or biases), η (eta) is the learning rate (the step
                   size), and ∆w is the gradient value.
                        Listing 9-1 gives an algorithm for training a neural network using gradi-
                   ent descent.

                   1. Pick some intelligent starting values for the weights and biases.
                   2. Run the training set through the network using its current weights and
                   biases and calculate the average loss.
                   3. Use this loss to get the gradient for each weight and bias.
                   4. Update the weight or bias value by the step size times the gradient value.
                   5. Repeat from step 2 until the loss is low enough.

                   Listing 9-1: Gradient descent in five (deceptively) simple steps

                        The algorithm appears simple, but as they say, the devil is in the de-
                   tails. We have to make choices at every step, and every choice we make will
                   prompt further questions. For example, step 1 says to “Pick some intelligent
                   starting values.” What should they be? It turns out that successfully training
                   a neural network depends critically on choosing good initial values. We al-
                   ready saw how this might be so in our preceding example using Figure 9-1
                   where if we start at A, we won’t find the minimum at C. Much research has
                   been conducted over the years related to step 1.
                        Step 2 is straightforward; it’s the forward-pass through the network. We
                   haven’t talked in detail about the loss function itself; for now, just think of it
                   as a function measuring the effectiveness of the network on the training set.
                        Step 3 is a black box for the time being. We’ll explore how to do it short-
                   ly. For now, assume we can find the gradient values for each parameter.
                        Step 4 follows the form of the previous equation that moves the param-
                   eter from its current value to one that will reduce the overall loss. In prac-
                   tice, the simple form of this equation is not sufficient; there are other terms,
                   like momentum, that preserve some fraction of the previous weight change
                   for the next iteration (next pass of the training data through the network)
                   so that parameters do not change too wildly. We’ll revisit momentum later.
                   For now, let’s look at a variation of gradient descent, the one that is actually
                   used to train deep networks.


      Stochastic Gradient Descent
                   The previous steps describe gradient descent training of a neural network.
                   As we might expect, in practice there are many different flavors of this ba-
                   sic idea. One that’s in widespread use and works well empirically is called
                   stochastic gradient descent (SGD). The word stochastic refers to a random pro-
                   cess. We’ll see next why the word stochastic goes before gradient descent in
                   this case.


194    Chapter 9
Batches and Minibatches
Step 2 of Listing 9-1 says to run the complete training set through the net-
work using the current values of the weights and biases. This approach is
called batch training, so named because we use all of the training data to es-
timate the gradients. Intuitively, this is a reasonable thing to do: we’ve care-
fully constructed the training set to be a fair representation of the unknown
parent process that generates the data, and it’s this parent process we want
the network to successfully model for us.
     If our dataset is small, like the original iris dataset of Chapter 5, then
batch training makes sense. But what if our training dataset isn’t small?
What if it’s hundreds of thousands or even millions of samples? We’ll be
facing longer and longer training times.
     We’ve run into a problem. We want a large training set as that will
(hopefully) better represent the unknown parent process that we want to
model. But the larger the training set, the longer it takes to pass each sam-
ple through the network, get an average value for the loss, and update the
weights and biases. We call passing the entire training set through the net-
work an epoch, and we’ll need many dozens to hundreds of epochs to train
the network. Doing a better job of representing the thing we want to model
means longer and longer computation times because of all the samples that
must be passed through the network.
     This is where SGD comes into play. Instead of using all the training data
on each pass, let’s alternatively select a small subset of the training data and
use the average loss calculated from it to update the parameters. We’ll calcu-
late an “incorrect” gradient value because we’re estimating the loss over the
full training set using only a small sample, but we’ll save a lot of time.
     Let’s see how this sampling plays out with a simple example. We’ll de-
fine a vector of 100 random bytes using NumPy:

>>> d = np.random.normal(128,20,size=100).astype("uint8")
>>> d
130, 141, 99, 106, 135, 119, 98, 147, 152, 163, 118, 149, 122,
133, 115, 128, 176, 132, 173, 145, 152, 79, 124, 133, 158, 111,
139, 140, 126, 117, 175, 123, 154, 115, 130, 108, 139, 129, 113,
129, 123, 135, 112, 146, 125, 134, 141, 136, 155, 152, 101, 149,
137, 119, 143, 136, 118, 161, 138, 112, 124, 86, 135, 161, 112,
117, 145, 140, 123, 110, 163, 122, 105, 135, 132, 145, 121, 92,
118, 125, 154, 148, 92, 142, 118, 128, 128, 129, 125, 121, 139,
152, 122, 128, 126, 126, 157, 124, 120, 152

    Here the byte values are normally distributed around a mean of 128.
The actual mean of the 100 values is 130.9. Selecting subsets of these values,
10 at a time, gives us an estimate of the actual mean value

>>> i = np.argsort(np.random.random(100))
>>> d[i[:10]].mean()
138.9



                                                         Training a Neural Network   195
                  with repeated subsets leading to estimated means of 135.7, 131.7, 134.2,
                  128.1, and so forth.
                       None of the estimated means are the actual mean, but they are all close
                  to it. If we can estimate the mean from a random subset of the full dataset,
                  we can see by analogy that we should be able to estimate the gradients of
                  the loss function with a subset of the full training set. Since the sample is
                  randomly selected, the resulting gradient values are randomly varying esti-
                  mates. This is why we add the word stochastic in front of gradient descent.
                       Because passing the full training set through the network on each weight
                  and bias update step is known as batch training, passing a subset through is
                  known as minibatch training. You will hear people use the term minibatch
                  quite frequently. A minibatch is the subset of the training data used for each
                  stochastic gradient descent step. Training is usually some number of epochs,
                  where the relationship between epochs and minibatches is as follows:
                                         (                                )
                                           number of training set samples
                               1 epoch =                                    minibatches
                                                  minibatch size

                       In practice, we don’t really want to select the minibatches at random
                  from the full training set. If we do that, we run the risk of not using all the
                  samples: some might never be selected, and others might be selected too
                  often. Typically, we randomize the order of the training samples and select
                  fixed-size blocks of samples sequentially whenever a minibatch is required.
                  When all available training samples are used, we can shuffle the full training
                  set order and repeat the process. Some deep learning toolkits don’t even do
                  this; they instead cycle through the same set of minibatches again.


                  Convex vs. Nonconvex Functions
                  SGD sounds like a concession to practicality. In theory, it seems that we’d
                  never want to use it, and we might expect that our training results will suffer
                  because of it. However, the opposite is generally true. In some sense, gradi-
                  ent descent training of a neural network shouldn’t work at all because we’re
                  applying an algorithm meant for convex functions to one that is nonconvex.
                  Figure 9-2 illustrates the difference between a convex function and a non-
                  convex function.
                  1.8                                            1.2

                                                                 1.0
                  1.6
                                                                 0.8

                  1.4                                            0.6
                                                                 0.4
                  1.2
                                                                 0.2

                  1.0                                            0.0
                                                                –0.2
                    0.0     0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8     1.0    0.0     0.2     0.4     0.6    0.8   1.0

                  Figure 9-2: A convex function of x (left). A nonconvex function of x (right).
196   Chapter 9
     A convex function is such that a line segment between any two points on
the function does not cross the function at any other point. The black line
on the left of Figure 9-2 is one example, and any such segment will not cross
the function at any other point, indicating that this is a convex function.
However, the same can’t be said of the curve on the right of Figure 9-2. This
is the curve from Figure 9-1. Here the black line does cross the function.
     Gradient descent is designed to find the minimum when the function is
convex, and because it relies only on the gradient, the first derivative, it’s
sometimes known as a first-order optimization method. Gradient descent
should not work, in general, with nonconvex functions because it runs the
risk of getting trapped in a local minimum instead of finding the global min-
imum. Again, we saw this with the example in Figure 9-1.
     Here’s where stochastic gradient descent helps. In multiple dimensions,
the gradient will point in a direction that isn’t necessarily toward the nearest
minimum of the loss function. This means that our step will be in a slightly
wrong direction, but that somewhat wrong direction might help us avoid
getting trapped somewhere we don’t want to be.
     The situation is more complicated, of course, and more mysterious. The
machine learning community has been struggling with the contradiction
between the obvious success of using first-order optimization on the non-
convex loss function and the fact that it shouldn’t work at all.
     Two ideas are emerging. The first is what we just stated, that stochastic
gradient descent helps by actually moving us in a slightly wrong direction.
The second idea, which seems to be pretty much proven now, is that, for the
loss functions used in deep learning, it turns out that there are many, many
local minimums and that these are all basically the same, so that landing in
almost any one of them will result in a network that performs well.
     Some researchers argue that most gradient descent learning winds up
on a saddle point; this is a place that looks like a minimum but isn’t. Imagine
a saddle for a horse and place a marble in the middle. The marble will sit in
place, but you could push the marble in a certain direction and have it roll
off the saddle. The argument, not without some justification, is that most
training ends on a saddle point, and better results are possible with a bet-
ter algorithm. Again, however, even the saddle point, if it is one, is still for
practical purposes a good place to be, so the model is successful regardless.
     In practice, then, we should use stochastic gradient descent because it
leads to better overall learning and reduces the training time by not requir-
ing full batches. It does introduce a new hyperparameter, the minibatch size,
that we must select at some point before training.


Ending Training
We haven’t yet discussed a critical question: when should we stop training?
Remember that in Chapter 5, we went through some effort to create train-
ing sets, validation sets, and test sets. This is where we’ll use the validation
sets. While training, we can use the accuracy, or some other metric, on the
validation set to decide when to stop. If using SGD, we typically run the val-
idation set through the network for each minibatch or set of minibatches to

                                                          Training a Neural Network   197
                  compute the accuracy. By tracking the accuracy on the validation set, we can
                  decide when to stop training.
                       If we train for a long time, eventually two things usually happen. The
                  first is that the error on the training set goes toward zero; we get better and
                  better on the training set. The second is that the error on the validation set
                  goes down and then, eventually, starts to go back up.
                       These effects are due to overfitting. The training error goes down and
                  down as the model learns more and more to represent the parent distribu-
                  tion that generated the dataset. But, eventually, it will stop learning general
                  things about the training set. At this point, we’re overfitting, and we want
                  to stop training because the model is no longer learning general features
                  and is instead learning minutiae about the particular training set we’re us-
                  ing. We can watch for this by using the validation set while training. Since
                  we don’t use the samples in the validation set to update the weights and bi-
                  ases of the network, it should give us a fair test of the current state of the
                  network. When overfitting starts, the error on the validation set will begin
                  to go up from a minimum value. What we can do then is to keep the weights
                  and biases that produced the minimum value on the validation set and claim
                  that those represent the best model.
                       We don’t want to use any data that has influenced training to measure
                  the final effectiveness of our network. We use the validation set to decide
                  when to stop training, so characteristics of the samples in the validation set
                  have also influenced the final model; this means we can’t strongly rely on
                  the validation set to give us an idea of how the model will behave on new
                  data. It’s only the held-out test set, unused until we declare victory over
                  training, that gives us some idea of how we might expect the model to per-
                  form on data in the wild. So, just as it is anathema to report training set ac-
                  curacy as a measure of how good the model is, it’s also anathema to report
                  the validation set accuracy.


                  Updating the Learning Rate
                  In our generic update equation for changing the weights and biases based
                  on the gradient, we introduced a hyperparameter, η (eta), the learning rate
                  or step size. It’s a scale factor indicating how much we should update the
                  weight or bias based on the gradient value.
                       We previously stated that the learning rate doesn’t need to be fixed and
                  that it could, and even should, get smaller and smaller as we train under the
                  assumption that we need smaller and smaller steps to get to the actual min-
                  imum value of the loss function. We didn’t state how we should actually up-
                  date the learning rate.




198   Chapter 9
     There’s more than one way to update the step size, but some are more
helpful than others. The MLPClassifier class of sklearn, which uses SGD
solvers, has three options. The first is to never change the learning rate—
just leave η at its initial value, η0 . The second is to scale η so that it decreases
with epochs (minibatches) according to
                                            η0
                                       η=
                                            tp
where η0 is set by the user, t is the iteration (epoch, minibatch), and p is an
exponent √on t, also picked by the user. The sklearn default p is 0.5—that is,
scale by t, which seems a reasonable default.
      The third option is to adapt the learning rate by watching the loss func-
tion value. As long as the loss is decreasing, leave the learning rate where
it is. When the loss stops decreasing for a set number of minibatches, di-
vide the learning rate by some value like 5, the sklearn default. If we never
change the learning rate, and it’s too large, we might end up moving around
the minimum without ever being able to reach it because we’re consistently
stepping over it. It’s a good idea then to decrease the learning rate when us-
ing SGD. Later in the book, we’ll encounter other optimization approaches
that automatically adjust the learning rate for us.


Momentum
There’s one last wrinkle in SGD we have to cover. As we saw previously, the
weight update equation for both gradient descent and SGD is

                                   w ← w – η∆w

We update the weight by the learning rate (η) times the gradient, which we
are representing here as ∆w.
    A common and powerful trick is to introduce a momentum term that
adds back some fraction of the previous ∆w, the update of the prior mini-
batch. The momentum term prevents the w parameter from changing too
quickly in response to a particular minibatch. Adding in this term gives us

                           wi+1 ← wi – η∆wi + µ∆wi–1

We’ve added subscripts to indicate the next pass through the network (i + 1),
the current pass (i), and the previous pass (i – 1). The previous pass ∆w is the
one we need to use. A typical value for µ (mu), the momentum, is around
0.9. Virtually all toolkits implement momentum in some form, including
sklearn.




                                                             Training a Neural Network   199
      Backpropagation
                   We’ve been operating under the assumption that we know the gradient
                   value for each parameter. Let’s discuss how the backpropagation algorithm
                   gives us these magic numbers. The backpropagation algorithm is perhaps
                   the single most important development in the history of neural networks as
                   it enables the training of large networks with hundreds, thousands, millions,
                   and even billions of parameters. This is especially true of the convolutional
                   networks we’ll work with in Chapter 12.
                        The backpropagation algorithm itself was published by Rumelhart, Hin-
                   ton, and Williams in 1986 in their paper “Learning Representations by Back-
                   propagating Errors.” It’s a careful application of the chain rule for deriva-
                   tives. The algorithm is called backpropagation because it works backward
                   from the output layer of the network toward the input layer, propagating
                   the error from the loss function down to each parameter of the network.
                   Colloquially, the algorithm is known as backprop; we’ll use that term here, so
                   we sound more like native machine learning experts.
                        Adding backprop into the training algorithm for gradient descent, and
                   tailoring it to SGD, gives us the algorithm in Listing 9-2.

                   1. Pick some intelligent starting values for the weights and biases.
                   2. Run a minibatch through the network using its current weights and biases
                   and calculate the average loss.
                   3. Use this loss and backprop to get the gradient for each weight and bias.
                   4. Update the weight or bias value by the step size times the gradient value.
                   5. Repeat from step 2 until the loss is low enough.

                   Listing 9-2: Stochastic gradient descent with backprop

                        Step 2 of Listing 9-2 is referred to as the forward pass; step 3 is the back-
                   ward pass. The forward pass is also how we’ll use the network after it’s finally
                   trained. The backward pass is backprop calculating the gradients for us so
                   that we can update the parameters in step 4.
                        We’ll describe backprop twice. First, we’ll do so with a simple example
                   and work with the actual derivatives. Second, we’ll work with a more ab-
                   stract notation to see how backprop applies to actual neural networks in a
                   general sense. There is no way to sugarcoat this: this section involves deriva-
                   tives, but we already have a good intuitive sense of what those are from our
                   discussion of gradient descent, so we should be in good shape to proceed.


                   Backprop, Take 1
                   Suppose we have two functions, z = f(y) and y = g(x), meaning z = f(g(x)).
                   We know that the derivative of the function g gives us dy/dx, which tells us
                   how y changes when x changes. Similarly, we know that the derivative of the
                   function f will give us dz/dy. The value of z depends upon the composition




200    Chapter 9
of f and g, meaning the output of g is the input to f, so if we want to find an
expression for dz/dx, how z changes with x, we need a way to link through
the composed functions. This is what the chain rule for derivatives gives us:
                                         dz dz dy
                                           =
                                         dx dy dx

This notation is especially nice because we can imagine the dy “term” cancel-
ing just as it would if these were actual fractions.
     How does this help us? In a neural network, the output of one layer is
the input to the next, which is composition, so we can see intuitively that
the chain rule might apply. Remember that we want the values that tell us
how the loss function changes with respect to the weights and biases. Let’s
call the loss function L and any given weight or bias w. We want to calculate
∂L/∂w for all the weights and biases.
     Alarm bells should be going off in your head. The previous paragraph
slipped in new notation. So far, we’ve been writing derivatives as dy/dx, but
the derivative for the loss with respect to a weight was written as ∂L/∂w.
What is this fancy ∂?
     When we had a function of one variable, just x, there was only one slope
at a point to talk about. As soon as we have a function with more than one
variable, the idea of the slope at a point becomes ambiguous. There are an
infinite number of lines tangent to the function at any point. So we need the
idea of the partial derivative, which is the slope of the line in the direction of
the variable we’re considering when all other variables are treated as fixed.
This tells us how the output will change as we change only the one variable.
To note that we are using a partial derivative, we shift from d to ∂, which is
just a script d.
     Let’s set up a straightforward network so that we can see how the chain
rule leads directly to the expressions we want. We’re looking at the network
in Figure 9-3, which consists of an input, two hidden layers of a single node
each, and an output layer.


  x                   h1                  h2                y
           w1                  w2                    w3
Figure 9-3: A simple network to illustrate the chain rule

For simplicity, we’ll ignore any bias values. Additionally, let’s define the ac-
tivation function to be the identity function, h(x) = x. This simplification
removes the derivative of the activation function to make things more trans-
parent.




                                                                Training a Neural Network   201
                      For this network, the forward pass computes

                                                        h1 = w1 x


                                                        h2 = w2 h1


                                                          y = w3 h2

                  which follows the form we’ve used previously, chaining things together by
                  making the output of one layer the input to the next. This gives us the out-
                  put of the network, y, for input x. If we’re looking to train the network, we’ll
                  have a training set, a set of pairs, (xi , ŷi ), i = 0, 1, . . ., that are examples of
                  what the output should be for a given input. Note that the forward pass
                  moved from the input, x, to the output, y. We’ll next see why the backward
                  pass moves from the output to the input.
                       Now let’s define the loss function, L, to be the squared error between
                  y, the network output for a given input x, and ŷ, the output we should get.
                  Functionally, the loss looks like the following.
                                                           1
                                                      L=     (y – ŷ)2
                                                           2

                  For simplicity, we’re ignoring the fact that the loss is a mean over the train-
                  ing set or some minibatch drawn from it. The factor of 12 is not strictly nec-
                  essary but it’s commonly used to make the derivative a bit nicer. Since we’re
                  looking to minimize the loss for a particular set of weights, it doesn’t matter
                  that we’re always multiplying the loss by a constant factor of 12 —the smallest
                  loss will still be the smallest loss regardless of its actual numeric value.
                       To use gradient descent, we need to find how the loss changes with the
                  weights. In this simple network, that means we need to find three gradient
                  values, one each for w1 , w2 , and w3 . This is where the chain rule comes into
                  play. We’ll write the equations first and then talk about them:

                                                 ∂L   ∂L ∂y
                                                    =
                                                 ∂w3 ∂y ∂w3


                                                 ∂L   ∂L ∂y ∂h2
                                                    =
                                                 ∂w2 ∂y ∂h2 ∂w2


                                                 ∂L   ∂L ∂y ∂h2 ∂h1
                                                    =
                                                 ∂w1 ∂y ∂h2 ∂h1 ∂w1




202   Chapter 9
    The order of these equations shows why this algorithm is called backprop-
agation. To get the partial derivative for the output layer parameter, we need
only the output and the loss, y and L. To get the partial derivative for the
middle layer weight, we need the following two partial derivatives from the
output layer:

                                       ∂L
                                       ∂y


                                      ∂y
                                      ∂h2

Finally, to get the partial derivative for the input layer weight, we need par-
tial derivatives from the output and middle layer. In effect, we have moved
backward through the network propagating values from later layers.
     For each of these equations, the right-hand side matches the left-hand
side if we imagine the “terms” canceling like fractions. Since we selected a
particularly simple form for the network, we can calculate the actual gradi-
ents by hand. We need the following gradients, from the right-hand side of
the preceding equations.

                            ∂L
                               = (y – ŷ)
                            ∂y


                            ∂y
                               = h2 = w2 h1 = w2 w1 x
                           ∂w3

                           ∂y
                               = w3
                           ∂h2


                           ∂h2
                               = h1 = w1 x
                           ∂w2


                           ∂h2
                               = w2
                           ∂h1

                           ∂h1
                               =x
                           ∂w1

The ∂L/∂y comes from the form we selected for the loss and the rules of
differentiation from calculus.



                                                         Training a Neural Network   203
                      Putting these back into the equations for the gradients of the weights
                  gives us

                                                ∂L
                                                    = (y – ŷ)w2 w1 x
                                                ∂w3

                                                ∂L
                                                    = (y – ŷ)w3 w1 x
                                                ∂w2


                                                ∂L
                                                    = (y – ŷ)w3 w2 x
                                                ∂w1

                      After a forward pass, we have numeric values for all the quantities on
                  the right-hand side of these equations. Therefore, we know the numeric
                  value of the gradients. The update rule from gradient descent then tells us
                  to change the weights like the following.

                                                    ∂L
                                      w3 ← w3 – η       = w3 – η(y – ŷ)w2 w1 x
                                                    ∂w3

                                                    ∂L
                                      w2 ← w2 – η       = w2 – η(y – ŷ)w3 w1 x
                                                    ∂w2


                                                    ∂L
                                      w1 ← w1 – η       = w1 – η(y – ŷ)w3 w2 x
                                                    ∂w1

                  where η is the learning rate parameter defining how large a step to take
                  when updating.
                      To recap, we need to use the chain rule, the heart of the backprop algo-
                  rithm, to find the gradients we need to update the weights during training.
                  For our simple network, we were able to work out the value of these gradi-
                  ents explicitly by moving backward through the network from the output
                  toward the input. Of course, this is just a toy network. Let’s now take a sec-
                  ond look at how to use backprop in a more general sense to calculate the
                  necessary gradients for any network.


                  Backprop, Take 2
                  Let’s begin by revisiting the loss function and introducing some new nota-
                  tion. The loss function is a function of all the parameters in the network,
                  meaning that every weight and bias value contributes to it. For example, the




204   Chapter 9
loss for the network of Figure 8-1, which has 20 weights and biases, could be
written as

                           (1)   (1)   (1)      (1)   (1)   (1)   (1)    (1)    (1)
               loss = L(w00 , w01 , w02 , w10 , w11 , w12 , b0 , b1 , b2 ,


                           (2)   (2)   (2)      (2)   (2)   (2)   (2)    (2)
                         w00 , w01 , w10 , w11 , w20 , w21 , b0 , b1 ,


                           (3)   (3)   (3)
                         w00 , w10 , b0 )

Note we’ve introduced a new notation for the parameters:
                                                (i)
                                               wjk

This represents the weight that links the j-th input, an output of the i – 1
layer, to the k-th node of layer i. We also have
                                                (i)
                                               bk

to represent the bias value for the k-th node of the i-th layer. Here layer 0 is
the input layer itself. The parentheses on the exponent are a label, the layer
number; they should not be interpreted as actual exponents. Therefore,
                                                (2)
                                              w20

is the weight from the third output of the first layer to the first node of the
second layer. This is the highlighted weight in Figure 9-4. Remember that we
always number nodes top to bottom, starting with 0.


   Layer 0                 1                     2                 3
                           0

          x0                                     0

Input                      1                                       y           Output

          x1                                     1

                           2
                                             w(2)20

Figure 9-4: The network of Figure 8-1 with weight w(2) 20 marked
with a bold line




                                                                        Training a Neural Network   205
                      This notation is a bit daunting, but it will let us reference any weight or
                  bias of the network precisely. The number we need to use backprop is the
                  partial derivative of the loss with respect to each weight or bias. Therefore,
                  what we want to find ultimately is written, in all its glorious mathematical
                  notation, as
                                                          ∂L
                                                               (i)
                                                        ∂wjk

                  This gives us the slope: the amount the loss will change for a change in the
                  weight linking the k-th node of the i-th layer to the j-th output of the i – 1
                  layer. A similar equation gives us the partial derivatives of the biases.
                       We can simplify this cumbersome notation by dealing only with the
                  layer number understanding that buried in the notation is a vector (biases,
                  activations) or matrix (weights) so that we want to find
                                                    ∂L      ∂L
                                                         and (i)
                                                   ∂w(i)    ∂b

                  These correspond to a matrix for all the weights linking layer i – 1 to i, and a
                  vector for all the biases of layer i, respectively.
                       We’ll protect our notational sanity by looking at things in terms of vec-
                  tors and matrices. Let’s start with the output layer and see what that buys us.
                  We know that the activations of the output layer, layer L, are found via

                                             a(L) = h(W(L) a(L–1) + b(L) )

                  with a being the activations from layer L – 1, b the bias vector for layer L, and
                  W the weight matrix between layers L – 1 and L. The activation function is h.
                      Additionally, we’ll define the argument to h to be z(L)

                                              z(L) ≡ W(L) a(L–1) + b(L)

                  and call ∂L/∂z(l) the error, the contribution to the loss from the inputs to
                  layer l. Next, we define
                                                               ∂L
                                                     δ (l) ≡
                                                               ∂z(l)

                  so that we can work with δ (delta) from now on.




206   Chapter 9
           For the output layer, we can write δ as
                                              ∂L     ∂L
                                   δ (L) =     (L)
                                                   = (L) · h′ (z(L) )
                                             ∂z     ∂a

       The notation h′ (z(L) ) is another way to write the derivative of h (with respect
       to z) evaluated at z(L) . The · represents elementwise multiplication. This is
       the way NumPy works when multiplying two arrays of the same size so that if
       C = A · B, then Cij = Aij Bij . Technically, this product is called the Hadamard
       product, named for the French mathematician Jacques Hadamard.
            The preceding means that to use backpropagation, we need a loss func-
       tion that can be differentiated—a loss function for which a derivative exists
       at every point. This isn’t too much of a burden; the loss functions we’ll ex-
       amine in the next section meet this criterion. We also need an activation
       function that can be differentiated so we can find h′ (z). Again, the activation
       functions we have considered so far are essentially all differentiable.

NOTE   I say “essentially” because the derivative of the ReLU is undefined at x = 0. The
       derivative from the left is 0 while the derivative from the right is 1. In practice, im-
       plementations choose a particular value to return should the argument to the deriva-
       tive of the ReLU be exactly 0. For example, TensorFlow simply asks if the argument
       is less than or equal to 0 and, if it is, returns 0 as the derivative. Otherwise, it re-
       turns 1. This works because, numerically, there is so much rounding off happening
       to floating-point values during calculations that it’s unlikely the value passed to the
       derivative of the ReLU function was actually meant to be identically 0.
           The equation for δ tells us the error due to the inputs to a particular lay-
       er. We’ll see next how to use this to get the error from each weight of a layer.
           With δ (L) in hand, we can propagate the error down to the next layer via

                                   δ (l) = ((W(l+1) )T δ l+1 ) · h′ (z(l) )

       where, for the next-to-last layer, l + 1 = L. The T represents matrix transpose.
       This is a standard matrix operation that involves a reflection across the diag-
       onal so that if
                                                      
                                               1 2 3
                                        A = 4 5 6
                                               7 8 9

       then
                                                       
                                                   1 4 7
                                             AT = 2 5 8
                                                   3 6 9




                                                                              Training a Neural Network   207
                        We need the transpose of the weight matrix because we are going in the
                   opposite direction from the forward pass. If there are three nodes in layer
                   l and two in layer l + 1, then the weight matrix between them, W, is a 2 × 3
                   matrix, so Wx is a two-element vector. In backprop, we are going from layer
                   l + 1 to layer l, so we transpose the weight matrix to map the two-element
                   vector, here δ, to a three-element vector for layer l.
                        The δ (l) equation is used for every layer moving backward through the
                   network. The output layer values are given by δ (L) , which starts the process.
                        Once we have the errors per layer, we can finally find the gradient values
                   we need. For the biases, the values are the elements of δ for that layer
                                                       ∂L           (l)
                                                        (l)
                                                               = δj
                                                      ∂bj

                   for the j-th element of the bias for the l-th layer. For the weights, we need
                                                    ∂L          (l–1) (l)
                                                       (l)
                                                             = ak    δj
                                                    ∂wkj

                   linking the k-th output of the previous layer to the j-th error for the current
                   layer, l.
                        Using the preceding equations for each layer of the network gives us the
                   set of weight and bias gradient values needed to continue applying gradient
                   descent.
                        As I hope you can see from this rather dense section, we can use a con-
                   venient mathematical definition of the error to set up an iterative process
                   that moves the error from the output of the network back through the lay-
                   ers of the network to the input layer. We cannot calculate the errors for a
                   layer without already knowing the errors for the layer after it, so we end
                   up propagating the error backward through the network, hence the name
                   backpropagation.


      Loss Functions
                   The loss function is used during training to measure how poorly the network
                   is doing. The goal of training is to make this value as small as possible, while
                   still generalizing to the true characteristics of the data. In theory, we can cre-
                   ate any loss function we want if we feel it’s relevant to the problem at hand.
                   If you read the deep learning literature, you’ll see papers do this all the time.
                   Still, most research falls back on a few standard loss functions that, empiri-
                   cally, do a good job most of the time. We’ll discuss three of those here: ab-
                   solute loss (sometimes called L1 loss), mean squared error (sometimes called
                   L2 loss), and cross-entropy loss.




208    Chapter 9
Absolute and Mean Squared Error Loss
Let’s start with the absolute and mean squared error loss functions. We’ll
discuss them together because they’re very similar mathematically.
    We’ve seen mean squared error already in our discussion of backprop.
Absolute loss is new. Mathematically, the two equations are

                                    Labs = |y – ŷ|


                                            1
                                LMSE =        (y – ŷ)2
                                            2

where we’ve labeled them abs for absolute value and MSE for mean squared
error, respectively. Note that we’ll always use y for the network output, the
output from the forward pass with input x. We’ll always use ŷ for the known
training class label, which is always an integer label starting with 0.
     Even though we’re writing the loss functions in a simple form, we need
to remember that when used, the value is really the mean of the loss over
the training set or minibatch. This is also the origin of mean in mean squared
error. Therefore, we really should be writing this:

                           1 ∑1                 1 ∑
                              N                           N
                  LMSE =        (yi – ŷi )2 =     (yi – ŷi )2
                           N  2                2N
                              i=1                         i=1

Here we’re finding the average of the squared error loss over the N values in
the training set (or minibatch).
     Both of these loss functions are reasonable if we consider what they
are measuring. We want the network to output a value that matches the
expected value, the sample label. The difference between these two is an
indication of how wrong the network output is. For the absolute loss, we
find the difference and drop the sign, which is what the absolute value does.
For the MSE loss, we find the difference and then square it. This also makes
the difference positive because multiplying a negative number by itself al-
ways results in a positive number. As mentioned in the ”Backpropagation”
section on page 200, the 12 factor on the MSE loss simplifies the derivative of
the loss function but does not change how it works.
     The absolute loss and MSE are different, however. The MSE is more
sensitive to outliers. This is because we’re squaring the difference, and a
plot of y = x2 grows quickly as x, the difference, gets larger. For the abso-
lute loss, this effect is minimized because there is no squaring; the difference
is merely the difference.
     In truth, neither of these loss functions are commonly used for neural
networks when the goal of the network is classification, which is our implicit




                                                                Training a Neural Network   209
                  assumption in this book. It’s more common to use the cross-entropy loss,
                  presented next. We want the network output to lead to the correct class la-
                  bel for the input. However, it’s entirely possible to train a network to output
                  a continuous real value instead. This is called regression, and both of these
                  loss functions are quite useful in that context.


                  Cross-Entropy Loss
                  Even though we can use the absolute and MSE loss functions in training a
                  neural network for classification, the most commonly used loss is the cross-
                  entropy loss (closely related to the log-loss). This loss function assumes the
                  output of the network is a softmax (vector) for the multiclass case or a sig-
                  moid (logistic, scalar) for the binary case. Mathematically, it looks like this
                  for M classes in the multiclass case:

                                             ∑
                                             M
                                  Lent = –       ŷj log yj (multiclass case)
                                             i


                                  Lent = –ŷ log(y) + (1 – ŷ) log(1 – y) (binary case)

                  What is the cross-entropy doing that often makes it a better choice for train-
                  ing a neural network for classification? Let’s think about the multiclass case
                  with softmax outputs. The definition of softmax means that the network out-
                  puts can be thought of as probability estimates of the likelihood that the in-
                  put represents each of the possible classes. If we have three classes, we might
                  get a softmax output that looks like this:

                                                  y = (0.03, 0.87, 0.10)

                  This output roughly means that the network thinks there is a 3 percent
                  chance the input is of class 0, an 87 percent chance it is of class 1, and a 10
                  percent chance it is of class 2. This is the output vector, y. We compute the
                  loss by supplying the actual label via a vector where 0 means not this class and
                  1 means this class. So, the ŷ vector associated with the input that led to this y
                  would be

                                                       ŷ = (0, 1, 0)

                  for an overall loss value of

                            Lent = –(0(log 0.03) + 1(log 0.87) + 0(log 0.10)) = 0.139262

                       The three predictions of the network can be thought of together as a
                  probability distribution, just like the one we get when we sum together the
                  likelihoods of different outcomes for throwing two dice. We also have a
                  known probability distribution from the class label. For the preceding ex-
                  ample, the actual class is class 1, so we made a probability distribution that

210   Chapter 9
         assigns no chance to classes 0 and 2, and 100 percent probability to class 1,
         the actual class. As the network trains, we expect the output distribution to
         be closer and closer to (0, 1, 0), the distribution for the label.
              Minimizing the cross-entropy drives the network toward better and bet-
         ter predictions of the probability distribution for the different classes we
         want the network to learn about. Ideally, these output distributions will look
         like the training labels: 0 for all classes except the actual class, which has an
         output of 1.
              For classification tasks, we usually use the cross-entropy loss. The sklearn
         MLPClassifier class uses cross-entropy. Keras supports cross-entropy loss as
         well, but provides many others, including absolute and mean squared error.


Weight Initialization
         Before we can train a neural network, we need to initialize the weights and
         biases. Step 1 of Listing 9-1 on gradient descent says to “Pick some intelli-
         gent starting values for the weights and biases.”
              The initialization techniques examined here all depend upon selecting
         random numbers in some range. More than that, the random numbers
         need to be either uniform over that range or normally distributed. Uni-
         formly distributed means that all the values in the range are equally likely to
         be selected. This is what you get for each number, 1 through 6, if you roll
         a fair die many times over. Normally distributed values were introduced in
         Chapter 4. These are values with a particular mean, the most likely value re-
         turned, and a range around the mean over which the likelihood of a value
         being selected falls off gradually toward 0 according to a parameter known
         as the standard deviation. This is the classic bell curve shape. Either distri-
         bution can be used. The main point is that the initial weights are not all the
         same value (like 0) because if they are, all gradients will be the same during
         backprop, and each weight will change in the same way. The initial weights
         need to be different to break this symmetry and allow individual weights to
         adapt themselves to the training data.
              In the early days of neural networks, people initialized the weights and
         biases by choosing values in [0, 1) uniformly (U(0, 1)) or by drawing them
         from the standard normal distribution, N(0, 1), with a mean of 0 and a stan-
         dard deviation of 1. These values were often multiplied by some small con-
         stant, like 0.01. In many cases, this approach works, at least for simple net-
         works. However, as networks became more complex, this simple approach
         fell apart. Networks initialized in this way had trouble learning, and many
         failed to learn at all.
              Let’s fast-forward several decades and a great deal of research later. Re-
         searchers realized that precisely how the weights of a particular layer should
         be initialized depended primarily on a few things: the type of activation
         function used and the number of weights coming into the layer (fin ) and,
         possibly, going out (fout ). These realizations led to the main initialization ap-
         proaches in use today.



                                                                    Training a Neural Network   211
                      The sklearn MLPClassifier class uses Glorot initialization. This is also
                  sometimes called Xavier initialization, though some toolkits mean some-
                  thing different when they use that term.1 (Note Xavier and Glorot actually
                  refer to the same person.) Let’s see how sklearn uses Glorot initialization.
                  The key method in MLPClassifier for initializing the weights is _init_coef.
                  This method uses a uniform distribution and sets the range for it so that the
                  weights are in
                                           [ √                 √            ]
                                                      A              A
                                             –               ,
                                                  fin + fout     fin + fout

                  where the bracket notation indicates the smallest possible value selected
                  (left) to the largest possible value (right). As the distribution is uniform, ev-
                  ery value in that range is equally likely to be selected.
                       We did not yet specify what A is. This value depends upon the activation
                  function used. According to the literature, if the activation function is a sig-
                  moid (logistic), then A = 2 is suggested. Otherwise, A = 6 is recommended.
                       Now to confuse things. Some toolkits, like Caffe, use an alternate form
                  of Xavier initialization by which they mean a multiplier on samples from
                  a standard normal distribution. In that case, we initialize the weights with
                  draws from
                                             √
                                                1
                                     N(0, 1)       (alternate Xavier initialization)
                                               fin

                      To add even more confusion, the introduction of the rectified linear
                  unit (ReLU) resulted in a further recommended change. This is known now
                  as He initialization and it replaces the 1 in Xavier initialization with a 2:
                                             √
                                                2
                                     N(0, 1)       (He initialization, ReLU only)
                                               fin

                  For more on this, see “Delving Deep into Rectifiers: Surpassing Human-
                  Level Performance on ImageNet Classification” by Kaiming He et al.
                       The key point with these initialization schemes is that the old-school
                  “small random value” is replaced by a more principled set of values that take
                  the network architecture into account via fin and fout .
                       The preceding discussion ignored bias values. This was intentional.
                  While it might be okay to initialize the bias values instead of leaving them
                  all 0, prevailing wisdom, which is fickle and fluid, currently says it’s best to
                  initialize them all to 0. That said, sklearn MLPClassifier initializes the bias val-
                  ues in the same way as the weights.


                  1. For more on these, see Glorot, Xavier, and Yoshua Bengio. “Understanding the Difficulty of
                  Training Deep Feedforward Neural Networks.”



212   Chapter 9
Overfitting and Regularization
        The goal of training a model is for it to learn essential, general features of
        the parent distribution the dataset is sampled from. That way, when the
        model encounters new inputs, it’s prepared to interpret them correctly. As
        we’ve seen in this chapter, the primary method for training a neural network
        involves optimization—looking for the “best” set of parameters so that the
        network makes as few errors as possible on the training set.
             However, it’s not enough to simply look for the best set of values that
        minimizes the training error. If we make no mistakes when classifying the
        training data, it’s often the case that we’ve overfitted and haven’t actually
        learned general features of the data. This is more likely the situation with
        traditional models, neural network or classical, and less so with deep models
        like the convolutional networks of Chapter 12.


        Understanding Overfitting
        We’ve mentioned overfitting from time to time before now but have not
        gained any good intuition as to what it is. One way to think of overfitting
        is to consider a separate problem, the problem of fitting a function to a set
        of points. This is known as curve fitting, and one approach to it is to optimize
        some measure of error over the points by finding parameters to the function
        that minimize the error. This should sound familiar. It’s exactly what we do
        when training a neural network.
             As an example of curve fitting, consider the following points:

                                         x      y

                                         0.00   50.0
                                         0.61   --17.8
                                         1.22   74.1
                                         1.83   29.9
                                         2.44   114.8
                                         3.06   55.3
                                         3.67   66.0
                                         4.28   89.1
                                         4.89   128.3
                                         5.51   180.8
                                         6.12   229.7
                                         6.73   229.3
                                         7.34   227.7
                                         7.95   354.9
                                         8.57   477.1
                                         9.18   435.4
                                         9.79   470.1


        We want to find a function, y = f(x), that describes these points—a function
        that might have been the parent function these points were measured from,
        albeit noisily.
              Typically, when curve fitting, we already know the form of the function;
        it’s the parameters we’re looking for. But what if we didn’t know the exact

                                                                 Training a Neural Network   213
                  form of the function, only that it was some kind of polynomial? In general, a
                  polynomial looks like this for some maximum exponent, n:

                                          y = a0 + a1 x + a2 x2 + a3 x3 + · · · + an xn

                  The goal of fitting a polynomial to a dataset is to find the parameters,
                  a0 , a1 , a2 , . . . , an . The method for doing this usually minimizes the squared
                  difference between y, a given output for a given x position, and f(x), the func-
                  tion output at the same x for the current set of parameters. This should
                  sound very familiar, as we discussed using precisely this type of loss function
                  for training a neural network.
                        How does this relate to overfitting? Let’s plot the previous dataset, along
                  with the result of fitting two different functions to it. The first function is

                                                     y = a0 + a1 x + a2 x2

                  which is a quadratic function, the type of function you may have learned to
                  hate as a beginning algebra student. The second function is

                                    y = a0 + a1 x + a2 x2 + a3 x3 + · · · + a14 x14 + a15 x15

                  which is a 15th-degree polynomial. The results are shown in Figure 9-5.

                  500




                  400




                  300




                  200




                  100




                    0


                        1       2          3         4          5            6            7     8   9

                  Figure 9-5: A dataset and two functions fit to it: a quadratic (dashed)
                  and a 15th-degree polynomial (solid)




214   Chapter 9
     Which function does a better job of capturing the general trend of the
dataset? The quadratic clearly follows the general trend of the data, while
the 15th-degree polynomial is all over the place. Look again at Figure 9-5.
If all we use to decide that we have fit the data well is the distance between
the data points and the corresponding function value, we’d say that the
15th-degree polynomial is the better fit; it passes through nearly all the data
points, after all. This is analogous to training a neural network and achiev-
ing perfection on the training set. The cost of that perfection might well be
a poor ability to generalize to new inputs. The quadratic fit of Figure 9-5 did
not hit the data points, but it did capture the general trend of the data, mak-
ing it more useful should we want to make predictions about the y values
we’d expect to get for a new x value.
     When a human wants to fit a curve to something like our sample dataset,
they usually look at the data and, noticing the general trend, select the func-
tion to fit. It might also be the case that the expected functional form is al-
ready known from theory. If we want to be analogous to neural networks,
however, we’ll find ourselves in a situation where we don’t know the proper
function to fit, and need to find a “best” one from the space of functions of
x along with its parameters.
     Hopefully, this example drives home the idea that training a neural net-
work is not an optimization problem like other optimization problems—we
need something to push the function the network is learning in a direction
that captures the essence of the data without falling into the trap of paying
too much attention to specific features of the training data. That something
is regularization, and you need it, especially for large networks that have a
huge capacity.


Understanding Regularization
Regularization is anything that pushes the network to learn the relevant fea-
tures of the parent distribution and not the details of the training set. The
best form of regularization is increasing the size and representative nature of
the training set. The larger the dataset and the better it represents all the
types of samples the network will encounter in the wild, the better it will
learn. Of course, we’re typically forced to work with a finite training set. The
machine learning community has spent, and is spending, untold time and
energy learning how to get more from smaller datasets.
     In Chapter 5, we encountered perhaps the second-best way to regular-
ize a model, data augmentation. This is a proxy for having a larger dataset,
where we use the data we do have to generate new training samples that are
plausibly from the parent distribution. For example, we considered increas-
ing a limited set of training images by simple rotations, flips, and shifts of
the images already in the training set. Data augmentation is powerful, and
you should use it when possible. It’s particularly easy to apply when working
with images as inputs, though in Chapter 5 we also saw a way to augment a
dataset consisting of continuously valued vectors.
     We now have two tricks in our regularization toolbox: more data and
data augmentation. These are the best tricks to know, but there others that

                                                         Training a Neural Network   215
                  you should use when available. Let’s look at two more: L2 regularization
                  and dropout. The former is now standard and widely supported by the tool-
                  kits, including sklearn and Keras. The latter is powerful and was a game
                  changer when it appeared in 2012.


                  L2 Regularization
                  A model with a few weights that have large values is somehow less simple
                  than a model that has smaller weights. Therefore, keeping the weights small
                  will hopefully allow the network to implement a simpler function better
                  suited to the task we want it to learn.
                       We can encourage the weights to be small by using L2 regularization.
                  L2 regularization adds a term to the loss function so that the loss becomes
                                                                  λ∑ 2
                                            L = L(x, y, w, b) +     wi
                                                                  2
                                                                   i

                  where the first term is whatever loss we’re already using, and the second
                  term is the new L2 regularization term. Notice that the loss is a function of
                  the input (x), the label (y), the weights (w), and the biases (b), where we mean
                  all the weights and all the biases of the network. The regularization term is a
                  sum over all the weights in the network and only the weights. The “L2” label
                  is what causes us to square the weights.
                       Here L2 refers to the type of norm or distance. You might be familiar
                  with the equation for the distance between two points on the plane: d2 =
                  (x2 – x1 )2 + (y2 – y1 )2 . This is the Euclidean distance, also known as the L2
                  distance, because the values are squared. This is why the regularization term
                  is called L2 and the weight values are squared. It’s also possible to use an
                  L1 loss term, where instead of squaring the weights, one uses the absolute
                  value. In practice, L2 regularization is more common and, at least empiri-
                  cally, seems to work better for neural network classifiers.
                       The λ (lambda) multiplier sets the importance of this term; the larger it
                  is, the more it dominates the overall loss used to train the network. Typical
                  values of λ are around 0.0005. We’ll see in a little bit why the multiplier is
                  λ/2 and not just λ.
                       What is the L2 term doing? Recall that the loss is the thing we want to
                  minimize while training. The new L2 term sums the squares of the weights
                  of the network. If weights are large, the loss is large, and that’s something
                  we don’t want while training. Smaller weights make the L2 term smaller, so
                  gradient descent will favor small weights, whether they are positive or neg-
                  ative, since we square the weight value. If all the weights of the network are
                  relatively small, and none strongly dominate, then the network will use all of
                  the weights to represent the data, and this is a good thing when it comes to
                  preventing overfitting.
                       L2 regularization is also known as weight decay because of what the L2
                  term does during backprop. Backprop gives us the partial derivative of the
                  loss function with respect to wi . Adding L2 regularization means that the
                  partial derivative of the total loss now adds in the partial derivative of the

216   Chapter 9
L2 term itself with respect to any particular weight, wi . The derivative of
λ w2 is λw; the 1 cancels the factor of 2 that would otherwise be there. Also,
2               2
since we want the partial derivative with respect to a specific weight, wi , all
the other parts of the L2 term go to 0. The net effect is that the update for
weight wi during gradient descent becomes
                                          ∂L
                            wi ← wi – η       – ηλwi
                                          ∂wi

where η (eta) is the learning rate, and we are ignoring any additional mo-
mentum term. The ηλwi term is new. It is due to L2 regularization, and we
can see that it’s pushing the weights toward 0 as training progresses because
both η and λ are < 1, so on each minibatch, we’re subtracting some small
fraction of the weight value. The weight can still increase, but to do so, the
gradient of the original loss must be large.
    We previously stated that the form of the loss function is up to us, the
developer of the network. A regularization term isn’t the only kind of term
we can add to the loss function. As we did with the L2 term, we can create
and add terms to change the behavior of the network during training and
help it learn what we want it to learn. This is a powerful technique that can
be used to customize various aspects of what a neural network learns.


Dropout
Dropout took the machine learning community by storm when it appeared
in 2012, see “Imagenet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Net-
works” by Alex Krizhevsky et al. As of Fall 2020, this paper has been cited
over 70,000 times, and as one well-known machine learning researcher told
me privately at the time, “If we had had dropout in the 1980s, this would be
a different world now.” So, what is dropout, and why was everyone so ex-
cited by it?
     To answer that question, we need to review the concept of ensembles of
models. We talked about them a bit in Chapter 6. An ensemble is a group of
models, all slightly different and all trained on the same dataset or a slightly
different version of the dataset. The idea is straightforward: since training
most models involves randomness, training multiple similar models should
result in a set that is mutually reinforcing—one where the set of outputs can
be combined to produce a result that is better than any one model alone.
Ensembles are useful, and we use them often, but they come at a price in
terms of runtime. If it takes x milliseconds to run a sample through a neural
network, and we have an ensemble of 20 networks, then our evaluation time
(inference time) has jumped to 20x milliseconds, ignoring the possibility of
parallel execution. In some situations, that is unacceptable (to say nothing
of the storage and power requirements for 20 big networks versus 1). Since
the net result of an ensemble of models is better overall performance, we
can say that an ensemble is a kind of regularizer as well since it embodies the
“wisdom of the crowd.”


                                                         Training a Neural Network   217
                       Dropout takes the ensemble idea to an extreme but does so only during
                  training and without creating a second network so that in the end, we still
                  have one model to deal with. Like many good ideas in statistics, this one re-
                  quires randomness. Right now, when we train the network, we do a forward
                  pass using the current weights and biases. What if, during that forward pass,
                  we randomly assign a 0 or a 1 to each node of the network so that nodes
                  with a 1 are used in the next layer while nodes with a 0 are dropped out?
                  We’d effectively be running the training samples through a different neural
                  network configuration each time. For example, see Figure 9-6.

                               1                                             0
                   x0                      1                     x0                      1
                               0                       y                     1               y
                   x1                      1                     x1                      1
                               0                                             1

                               0                                             1
                   x0                      0                     x0                      1
                               1                       y                     0               y
                   x1                      1                     x1                      0
                               0                                             1
                  Figure 9-6: Possible networks used when applying dropout during training

                       Here we show the network of Figure 8-1 but with a 0 or 1 for each of the
                  hidden nodes. This 0 or 1 determines whether the output is used or not.
                  The heavy lines in the network show the connections that are still valid. In
                  other words, the heavy lines show the network that was actually used to cre-
                  ate the output accumulated for backprop. If we do this for each training
                  sample, we can readily see that we’ll be training a vast number of neural net-
                  works, each trained on a single sample. Moreover, since the weights and bi-
                  ases persist between forward passes, all the networks will share those weights
                  in the hope that the process will reinforce good weight values that represent
                  the essence of the dataset. As we’ve mentioned several times in this chapter,
                  learning the essence of the data is the goal of training; we want to generalize
                  well to new data from the same virtual parent distribution that generated the
                  training set in the first place. Dropout is serious regularization.
                       I previously said that we “randomly assign a 0 or a 1” to the nodes. Do
                  we assign them equally? The probability with which we drop nodes in a layer
                  is something we get to specify. Let’s call it p. Typically, p = 0.5, meaning
                  about 50 percent of the nodes in a layer will be dropped for each training
                  sample. Setting p = 0.8 would drop 80 percent of the nodes, while p = 0.1
                  would drop only 10 percent. Sometimes a different probability is used for

218   Chapter 9
      different layers of the network, especially the first input layer, which should
      use a smaller probability than the hidden nodes. If we drop too many of the
      inputs, we’ll lose the source of the signal we’re trying to get the network to
      recognize. Dropout applied to the input layer can be thought of as a form of
      data augmentation.
           Conceptually, dropout is training a large set of networks that share
      weights. The output of each of these networks can be combined with the
      others via a geometric mean, assuming we use a softmax output. The geo-
      metric mean of two numbers is the square root of their product. The ge-
      ometric mean of n numbers is the nth root of their product. In the case
      of dropout, it turns out that this can be approximated by using the entire
      network with all the weights multiplied by the probability that they would
      be included. Given we said p is the probability that a node is dropped, the
      weights need to be multiplied by 1 – p, as that is the probability the node
      would not be dropped. So, if we fix p = 0.5 and use it for all the nodes, then
      the final network is the one where all the weights are divided by 2.
           As of this writing, sklearn’s MLPClassifier class does not support dropout,
      but Keras most certainly does, so we’ll see dropout again in Chapter 12.


Summary
      Because this is an important chapter, let’s review what we’ve learned in a lit-
      tle more depth. In this chapter, we described how to train a neural network
      using gradient descent and backpropagation. The overall sequence of steps
      is as follows:
          1.   Select the architecture of the model. This means the number of lay-
               ers, their sizes, and the type of activation function.
          2.   Initialize the weights and biases of the network using intelligently
               selected initial values.
          3.   Run a minibatch of training samples through the network and com-
               pute the mean loss over the minibatch. We discussed common loss
               functions.
          4.   Using backpropagation, calculate the contribution of each weight
               and bias to the overall loss for the minibatch.
          5.   Using gradient descent, update the weight and bias values of the
               model based on the contributions found via backpropagation. We
               discussed stochastic gradient descent and its relationship to the con-
               cept of minibatches.
          6.   Repeat from step 3 until the desired number of epochs or mini-
               batches have been processed, or the loss has dropped below some
               threshold, or stopped changing much, or when the score on a vali-
               dation set of samples has reached its minimum value.
          7.   If the network isn’t learning well, apply regularization and train
               again. We looked at L2 regularization and dropout in this chapter.
               Data augmentation, or increasing the size or representativeness of
               the training set, can also be thought of as regularization.


                                                               Training a Neural Network   219
                      The goal of training a neural network is to learn the parameters of a
                  model that generalizes well to unseen inputs. This is the goal of all super-
                  vised machine learning. For a neural network, we know it’s able to approxi-
                  mate any function, with enough capacity and enough training data. Naïvely,
                  we may think that we are doing nothing more than ordinary optimization,
                  but, in an important sense, we are not. Perfection on the training set is of-
                  ten not a good thing; it’s often a sign of overfitting. Instead, we want the
                  model to learn a function that captures the essential nature of the function
                  implied by the training set. We use the test data to give us confidence that
                  we’ve learned a useful function.
                      In the next chapter, we’ll get real and explore traditional neural net-
                  works through a series of experiments using sklearn.




220   Chapter 9
                         10
       EXPERIMENTS WITH NEURAL
              NETWORKS



             In Chapter 9, we discussed the theory be-
            hind neural networks. In this chapter, we’ll
           trade equations for code and run a number
        of experiments designed to increase our intu-
ition regarding the essential parameters of neural net-
works: architecture and activation functions, batch
size, base learning rate, training set size, L2 regulariza-
tion, momentum, weight initialization, feature order-
ing, and the precision of the weights and biases.
     To save space and eliminate tedious repetition, we won’t show the spe-
cific code for each experiment. In most cases, the code is only trivially dif-
ferent from the previous example; we’re usually changing only the partic-
ular argument to the MLPClassifier constructor we’re interested in. The code
for each experiment is included in the set of files associated with this book,
and we’ll list the network parameters and the name of the file. When neces-
sary, we’ll provide code to clarify a particular approach. We’ll show the code
for the first experiment in its entirety.
      Our Dataset
                    We’ll be working with the MNIST dataset’s vector form, which we assembled
                    in Chapter 5. Recall that this dataset consists of 28×28 pixel 8-bit grayscale
                    images of handwritten digits, [0, 9]. In vector form, each 28 × 28 image is
                    unraveled into a vector of 28 × 28 = 784 elements, all bytes ([0, 255]). The un-
                    raveling lays each row end to end. Therefore, each sample has 784 elements
                    and an associated label. The training set has 60,000 samples, while the test
                    set has 10,000. For our experiments, we won’t use all of the data in the train-
                    ing set. This is to help illustrate the effect of network parameters and to
                    keep our training times reasonable. Refer back to Figure 5-3 for represen-
                    tative MNIST digits.


      The MLPClassifier Class
                    The MLPClassifier class follows the same format as the other sklearn classi-
                    fiers. There is a constructor and the expected methods: fit for training,
                    score for applying the classifier to test data, and predict to make a predic-
                    tion on unknown inputs. We’ll also use predict_proba to return the actual
                    predicted per class probabilities. The constructor has many options:

                    MLPClassifier(hidden_layer_sizes=(100, ), activation='relu',
                      solver='adam', alpha=0.0001, batch_size='auto',
                      learning_rate='constant', learning_rate_init=0.001,
                      power_t=0.5, max_iter=200, shuffle=True,
                      random_state=None, tol=0.0001, verbose=False,
                      warm_start=False, momentum=0.9, nesterovs_momentum=True,
                      early_stopping=False, validation_fraction=0.1, beta_1=0.9,
                      beta_2=0.999, epsilon=1e-08)

                         Here we’ve provided the default values for each parameter. See the
                    sklearn documentation page at http://scikit-learn.org/ for a complete descrip-
                    tion of each parameter. We’ll set some of these to specific values, and others
                    will be changed for the experiments while still others are relevant in only
                    specific situations. The key parameters we’ll work with are in Table 10-1.
                         The following set of experiments explores the effect of various
                    MLPClassifier parameters. As mentioned, we’ll show all the code used for
                    the first experiment, understanding that only small changes are needed to
                    perform the other experiments. At times, we’ll show little code snippets to
                    make the change concrete.




222    Chapter 10
        Table 10-1: Important MLPClassifier Constructor Keywords
        and Our Default Values for Them

         Keyword              Description
         hidden_layer_sizes   Tuple giving the hidden layer sizes
         activation           Activation function type; for example, ReLU
         alpha                L2 parameter---we called it λ (lambda)
         batch_size           Minibatch size
         learning_rate_init   The learning rate, η (eta)
         max_iter             Number of training epochs
         warm_start           Continue training or start again
         momentum             Momentum
         solver               Solver algorithm ("sgd")
         nesterovs_momentum   Use Nesterov momentum (False)
         early_stopping       Use early stopping (False)
         learning_rate        Learning rate schedule ("constant")
         tol                  Stop early if loss change < tol (1e-8)
         verbose              Output to console while training (False)




Architecture and Activation Functions
        When designing a neural network, we immediately face two fundamental
        questions: what architecture and what activation function? These are ar-
        guably the most important deciding factors for a model’s success. Let’s ex-
        plore what happens when we train a model using different architectures and
        activation functions while holding the training dataset fixed.


        The Code
        As promised, for this first experiment we’ll show the code in its entirety,
        starting with the helper functions in Listing 10-1.

        import numpy as np
        import time
        from sklearn.neural_network import MLPClassifier

        def run(x_train, y_train, x_test, y_test, clf):
            s = time.time()




                                                                       Experiments with Neural Networks   223
                       clf.fit(x_train, y_train)
                       e = time.time()-s
                       loss = clf.loss_
                       weights = clf.coefs_
                       biases = clf.intercepts_
                       params = 0
                       for w in weights:
                           params += w.shape[0]*w.shape[1]
                       for b in biases:
                           params += b.shape[0]
                       return [clf.score(x_test, y_test), loss, params, e]

                   def nn(layers, act):
                       return MLPClassifier(solver="sgd", verbose=False, tol=1e-8,
                               nesterovs_momentum=False, early_stopping=False,
                               learning_rate_init=0.001, momentum=0.9, max_iter=200,
                               hidden_layer_sizes=layers, activation=act)

                   Listing 10-1: Helper functions for experimenting with the architecture and activation
                   function. See mnist_nn_experiments.py.

                        Listing 10-1 imports the usual modules and then defines two helper
                   functions, run and nn. Starting with nn, we see that all it does is return an in-
                   stance of MLPClassifier using the hidden layer sizes and the given activation
                   function type.
                        The hidden layer sizes are given as a tuple, where each element is the
                   number of nodes in the corresponding layer. Recall that sklearn works with
                   only fully connected layers, so a single number is all we need to specify the
                   size. The input samples given for training determine the size of the input
                   layer. Here the input samples are vectors representing the digit images, so
                   there are 28 × 28 = 784 nodes in the input layer.
                        What about the output layer? It’s not specified explicitly because it de-
                   pends on the number of classes in the training labels. The MNIST dataset
                   has 10 classes, so there will be 10 nodes in the output layer. When the
                   predict_proba method is called to get an output probability, sklearn applies
                   a softmax over the 10 outputs. If the model is binary, meaning the only class
                   labels are 0 and 1, then there is only one output node, a logistic (sigmoid),
                   representing the probability of belonging to class 1.
                        Now let’s look at the parameters we passed in to MLPClassifier. First,
                   we explicitly state that we want to use the SGD solver. The solver is the ap-
                   proach used to modify the weights and biases during training. All the solvers
                   use backprop to calculate the gradients; how we use those gradients varies.
                   Plain vanilla SGD is good enough for us right now.
                        Next, we set a low tolerance so that we’ll train the requested number of
                   epochs (max_iter). We also turn off Nesterov momentum (a variant of stan-
                   dard momentum) and early stopping (generally useful but not desired here).
                        The initial learning rate is set to the default value of 0.001, as is the
                   value of standard momentum, 0.9. The number of epochs is arbitrarily set to
                   200 (the default), but we’ll explore this more in the experiments that follow.

224   Chapter 10
Please indulge your curiosity at all times and see what changing these val-
ues does to things. For consistency’s sake, we’ll use these values as defaults
throughout unless they are the parameters we want to experiment with.
     The other helper function in Listing 10-1 is run. This function will train
and test the classifier object it’s passed using the standard sklearn fit and
score methods. It also does some other things that we have not seen before.
     In particular, after timing how long training takes, we extract the final
training loss value, the network weights, and the network biases from the
MLPClassifier object so that we can return them. The MLPClassifier class min-
imizes the log-loss, which we described in Chapter 9. We store the log-loss in
the loss_ member variable. The size of this value, and how it changes during
training, gives us a clue as to how well the network is learning. In general,
the smaller the log-loss, the better the network is doing. As you explore neu-
ral networks more and more, you’ll begin to develop intuition for what a
good loss value is and whether the training process is learning quickly or not
by how rapidly the loss changes.
     The weights and biases are stored in the coefs_ and intercepts_ member
variables. These are lists of NumPy matrices (weights) and vectors (biases),
respectively. Here we use them to calculate the number of parameters in
the network by summing the number of elements in each matrix and vector.
This is what the two small loops in the run function do. Finally, we return
all this information, including the score against the test set, to the main func-
tion. The main function is shown in Listing 10-2.

def main():
    x_train = np.load("mnist_train_vectors.npy").astype("float64")/256.0
    y_train = np.load("mnist_train_labels.npy")
    x_test = np.load("mnist_test_vectors.npy").astype("float64")/256.0
    y_test = np.load("mnist_test_labels.npy")

    N = 1000
    x_train = x_train[:N]
    y_train = y_train[:N]
    x_test = x_test[:N]
    y_test = y_test[:N]

    layers = [
        (1,), (500,), (800,), (1000,), (2000,), (3000,),
        (1000,500), (3000,1500),
        (2,2,2), (1000,500,250), (2000,1000,500),
    ]

    for act in ["relu", "logistic", "tanh"]:
        print("%s:" % act)
        for layer in layers:
            scores = []
            loss = []
            tm = []

                                                     Experiments with Neural Networks   225
                                 for i in range(10):
                                     s,l,params,e = run(x_train, y_train, x_test, y_test,
                                                         nn(layer,act))
                                     scores.append(s)
                                     loss.append(l)
                                     tm.append(e)
                                 s = np.array(scores)
                                 l = np.array(loss)
                                 t = np.array(tm)
                                 n = np.sqrt(s.shape[0])
                                 print("     layers: %14s, score= %0.4f +/- %0.4f,
                                       loss = %0.4f +/- %0.4f (params = %6d, time = %0.2f s)" % \
                                       (str(layer), s.mean(), s.std()/n, l.mean(),
                                         l.std()/n, params, t.mean()))

                   Listing 10-2: The main function for experimenting with the architecture and activation
                   function. See mnist_nn_experiments.py.

                        We first load the MNIST train and test data stored in x_train (samples)
                   and y_train (labels), and x_test and y_test. Notice that we divide the samples
                   by 256.0 to make them floats in the range [0, 1). This normalization is the
                   only preprocessing we’ll do in this chapter.
                        As the full training set has 60,000 samples and we want to run many
                   training sessions, we’ll use only the first 1,000 samples for training. We’ll
                   likewise keep the first 1,000 test samples. Our goal in this chapter is to see
                   relative differences as we change parameters, not to build the best model
                   possible, so we’ll sacrifice the quality of the model to get results in a reason-
                   able timeframe. With 1,000 training samples, we’ll have only 100 instances
                   of each digit type, on average. We’ll vary the number of training samples for
                   specific experiments.
                        The layers list holds the different architectures we’ll explore. Ultimately,
                   we’ll pass these values to the hidden_layer_sizes argument of the MLPClassifier
                   constructor. Notice that we’ll examine architectures ranging from a single
                   hidden layer with a single node to three hidden layers with up to 2,000 nodes
                   per layer.
                        The main loop runs over three activation function types: rectified lin-
                   ear unit, logistic (sigmoid) unit, and the hyperbolic tangent. We’ll train a
                   model for each combination of activation function type and architecture
                   (layers). Moreover, since we know neural network training is stochastic, we’ll
                   train 10 models for each combination and report the mean and standard
                   error of the mean, so we’re not thrown off by a particularly bad model that
                   isn’t representative.




226   Chapter 10
NOTE   When you run the code in the experiments that follow, you’ll likely generate warning
       messages from sklearn like this one:

       ConvergenceWarning: Stochastic Optimizer: Maximum iterations (200) reached
       and the optimization hasn't converged yet.

       The messages are sklearn’s way of telling you that the number of training itera-
       tions completed before sklearn felt that the network had converged to a good set of
       weights.The warnings are safe to ignore and can be disabled completely by adding
       -W ignore to the command line when you run the code; for example:

       $ python3 -W ignore mnist_nn_experiments.py



       The Results
       Running this code takes several hours to complete, and produces output
       with lines that look something like this:

       layers:(3000,1500), score=0.8822+/-0.0007, loss=0.2107+/-0.0006
       (params=6871510, time=253.42s)

           This tells us that using a ReLU activation function, and an architecture
       with two hidden layers of 3,000 and 1,500 nodes each, the models had an
       average score of 88.2 percent and an average final training loss of 0.21 (re-
       member that lower is better). It also tells us that the neural network had a
       total of nearly 6.9 million parameters and took, on average, a little more
       than four minutes to train.
           Table 10-2 summarizes the scores for the various network architectures
       and activation function types.

       Table 10-2: Mean Score (mean ± SE) on the MNIST Test Set as a Function of the
       Architecture and Activation Function Type

        Architecture         ReLU                 Tanh                    Logistic (sigmoid)
        1                    0.2066 ± 0.0046      0.2192 ± 0.0047         0.1718 ± 0.0118
        500                  0.8616 ± 0.0014      0.8576 ± 0.0011         0.6645 ± 0.0029
        800                  0.8669 ± 0.0014      0.8612 ± 0.0011         0.6841 ± 0.0030
        1000                 0.8670 ± 0.001       0.8592 ± 0.0014         0.6874 ± 0.0028
        2000                 0.8682 ± 0.0008      0.8630 ± 0.0012         0.7092 ± 0.0029
        3000                 0.8691 ± 0.0005      0.8652 ± 0.0011         0.7088 ± 0.0024
        1000; 500            0.8779 ± 0.0011      0.8720 ± 0.0011         0.1184 ± 0.0033
        3000; 1500           0.8822 ± 0.0007      0.8758 ± 0.0009         0.1221 ± 0.0001
        1000; 500; 250       0.8829 ± 0.0011      0.8746 ± 0.0012         0.1220 ± 0.0000
        2000; 1000; 500      0.8850 ± 0.0007      0.8771 ± 0.0010         0.1220 ± 0.0000




                                                                Experiments with Neural Networks   227
                        In each case, we show the mean score on the reduced test set averaged
                   over the 10 models trained (plus or minus the standard error of the mean).
                   There is quite a bit of information in this table, so let’s look at it carefully.
                        If we look at the activation type, we immediately see something is off.
                   The results for the logistic activation function show improved scores as the
                   single hidden layer gets larger, something we might expect to see, but when
                   we move to more than one hidden layer, the network fails to train. We know
                   that it was unable to train because the scores on the test set are abysmal. If
                   you check the output, you’ll see that the loss values do not go down. If the
                   loss value does not decrease while training proceeds, something is wrong.
                        It’s not immediately evident why training failed for the logistic activation
                   function case. One possibility is a bug in sklearn, but this is rather unlikely
                   given how widely used the toolkit is. The most likely culprit has to do with
                   network initialization. The sklearn toolkit uses the standard, commonly used
                   initialization schemes we discussed in Chapter 8. But these are tailored for
                   ReLU and tanh activation functions and may not be performing well for the
                   logistic case.
                        For our purposes, we can view this failure as a glaring sign that the logis-
                   tic activation function is not a good one to use for the hidden layers. Sadly,
                   this is precisely the activation function that was widely used throughout
                   much of the early history of neural networks, so we were shooting ourselves
                   in the foot from the beginning. No wonder it took so long for neural net-
                   works to finally find their proper place! From here on out, we’ll ignore the
                   logistic activation function results.
                        Consider again the scores for the single hidden layer networks (see
                   Table 10-2, rows 1–6). For the ReLU and tanh activation functions, we see
                   a steady improvement in the performance of the networks. Also, note that
                   in each case, the ReLU activation function slightly outperforms tanh for
                   the same number of nodes in the hidden layer, though these differences
                   are likely not statistically significant with only 10 models per architecture.
                   Still, it follows a general observation prevalent in the community: ReLU is
                   preferred to tanh.
                        If we look at the remaining rows of Table 10-2, we see that adding a sec-
                   ond and even third hidden layer continues to improve the test scores but
                   with diminishing returns. This is also a widely experienced phenomenon
                   that we should look at a little more closely. In particular, we should consider
                   the number of parameters in the models of Table 10-2. This makes the com-
                   parison a bit unfair. If, instead, we train models that have closely matched




228   Chapter 10
numbers of parameters, then we can more fairly compare the performance
of the models. Any differences in performance we see can be plausibly at-
tributed to the number of layers used since the overall number of parame-
ters will be virtually the same.
     By modifying the layers array in Listing 10-2, we can train multiple ver-
sions of the architectures shown in Table 10-3. The number of nodes per lay-
er was selected to parallel the overall number of parameters in the models.

Table 10-3: Model Architectures Tested to
Produce Figure 10-1

 Architecture        Number of parameters
 1000                795,010
 2000                1,590,010
 4000                3,180,010
 8000                6,360,010
 700; 350            798,360
 1150; 575           1,570,335
 1850; 925           3,173,685
 2850; 1425          6,314,185
 660; 330; 165       792,505
 1080; 540; 270      1,580,320
 1714; 857; 429      3,187,627
 2620; 1310; 655     6,355,475



     Where did the magic numbers in Table 10-3 come from? We first picked
the single-layer sizes we wanted to test. We then determined the number of
parameters in models with those architectures. Next, we crafted two-layer
architectures using the rules of thumb from Chapter 8 so that the number
of parameters in those models will be close to the corresponding number of
parameters in the single-layer models. Finally, we repeated the process for
three-layer models. Doing things this way lets us compare the performance
of the models for very similar numbers of parameters. In essence, we’re fix-
ing the number of parameters in the model and altering only the way they
interact with each other.
     Training models as we did in Listing 10-2, but this time averaging 25
models instead of just 10, gives us Figure 10-1.




                                                   Experiments with Neural Networks   229
                           0.885




                           0.880
                   Score



                           0.875




                           0.870

                                                                                                   One
                                                                                                   Two
                           0.865                                                                   Three

                                   1          2            3                4      5               6
                                                               Parameters                              1e6

                   Figure 10-1: Scores (mean ± E) on the MNIST test set for the architectures of
                   Table 10-3 as a function of the number of parameters in the network

                       Let’s parse Figure 10-1. First, note that the x-axis, the number of param-
                   eters in the model, is given in millions. Second, we can compare the three
                   lines going vertically as those models all have similar numbers of param-
                   eters. The legend tells us which plot represents models with one, two, or
                   three hidden layers.
                       Looking at the leftmost points, representing the smallest models in each
                   case, we see that changing from a single layer to two layers gives us a jump
                   in model performance. Also, moving from two layers to three results in an-
                   other, smaller rise. This repeats for all the layer sizes moving left to right.
                   We’ll address the dip in performance between the two largest models for
                   single- and double-layer architectures in a bit. Fixing the number of param-
                   eters but increasing the depth of the network (number of layers) results in
                   better performance. We might be tempted here to say, “Go deep, not wide,”
                   but there will be cases where this doesn’t work. Still, it’s worth remember-
                   ing: more layers can help, not just a wider layer with more nodes.




230   Chapter 10
            What about the dip for the largest models in the one- and two-layer
        cases? These are the rightmost points of Figure 10-1. Recall, the models
        used to make the plot were trained with only 1,000 samples each. For the
        largest models, there likely wasn’t enough data to adequately train such a
        wide model. If we were to increase the number of training samples, which
        we can do because we have 60,000 to choose from for MNIST, we might see
        the dip go away. I’ll leave this as an exercise for the reader.


Batch Size
        Let’s now turn our attention to how batch size affects training. Recall that
        here batch size means minibatch size, a subset of the full training set used in
        the forward pass to calculate the average loss over the minibatch. From this
        loss, we use backprop to update the weights and biases. Processing a single
        minibatch, then, results in a single gradient-descent step—a single update to
        the parameters of the network.
             We’ll train a fixed-size subset of MNIST for a set number of epochs with
        different minibatch sizes to see how that affects the final test scores. Before
        we do that, however, we need to understand, for epochs and minibatches,
        the process sklearn uses to train a neural network.
             Let’s look briefly at the actual sklearn source code for the MLPClassifier
        class, in the _fit_stochastic method, found at https://github.com/scikit-learn/
        scikit-learn/blob/7389dba/sklearn/neural_network/multilayer_perceptron.py. Un-
        derstanding that this method is an internal one and might change from ver-
        sion to version, we see code that looks like this:

        for it in range(self.max_iter):
          X, y = shuffle(X, y, random_state=self._random_state)
          accumulated_loss = 0.0
          for batch_slice in gen_batches(n_samples, batch_size):
            activations[0] = X[batch_slice]
            batch_loss, coef_grads, intercept_grads = self._backprop(
              X[batch_slice], y[batch_slice], activations, deltas,
              coef_grads, intercept_grads)
            accumulated_loss += batch_loss * (batch_slice.stop -
                                              batch_slice.start)
            grads = coef_grads + intercept_grads
            self._optimizer.update_params(grads)
          self.n_iter_ += 1




                                                            Experiments with Neural Networks   231
                         There are two for loops, the first over the number of epochs (max_iter),
                   and the second over the number of minibatches present in the training data.
                   The gen_batches function returns minibatches from the training set. In real-
                   ity, it returns slice indices with X[batch_slice] returning the actual training
                   samples, but the effect is the same. The calls to _backprop and update_params
                   complete the gradient descent step for the current minibatch.
                         An epoch is a full pass through the minibatches present in the training
                   set. The minibatches themselves are groupings of the training data so that
                   looping over the minibatches uses all the samples in the training set once. If
                   the number of training samples is not an integer multiple of the minibatch
                   size, the final minibatch will be smaller than expected, but that will not af-
                   fect training in the long run.
                         We can view this graphically as in Figure 10-2, where we see how an
                   epoch is built from the minibatches in the training set. In Figure 10-2, the
                   entire training set is represented as the epoch with n samples. A minibatch
                   has m samples, as indicated. The last minibatch is smaller than the rest to
                   indicate that the n/m might not be an integer.

                                                         epoch (n)




                      x0...xm–1    xm...x2m–1                                                       ...xn–1




                   minibatch (m)
                   Figure 10-2: The relationship between epochs (n), minibatches (m), and samples
                   {x0 ,x1 , . . .,xn-1 }

                        Figure 10-2 also implies that the order of the samples in the training set
                   is essential, which is why we shuffled the datasets when we made them. The
                   sklearn toolkit will also rearrange the samples after every epoch during train-
                   ing if desired. As long as a minibatch is, statistically, a random sample from
                   the training set as a whole, things should be okay. If the minibatch is not,
                   then it might give a biased view of the gradient direction during backprop.
                        Our minibatch experiment will fix the number of MNIST training sam-
                   ples at 16,384 while we vary the minibatch size. We’ll also fix the number of
                   epochs at 100. The scores we report are the mean and standard error for




232   Chapter 10
five different runs of the same model, each with a different random initial-
ization. The MLPClassifier object is therefore instantiated via

MLPClassifier(solver="sgd", verbose=False, tol=1e-8,
     nesterovs_momentum=False, early_stopping=False,
     learning_rate_init=0.001, momentum=0.9, max_iter=100,
     hidden_layer_sizes=(1000,500), activation="relu",
     batch_size=bz)

    This code indicates that all of the models have two hidden layers of
1,000 and 500 nodes, respectively, making the architecture of the entire
network 784-1000-500-10 when adding in the nodes of the input and out-
put layers. The only parameter that varies when defining a network is the
batch_size. We’ll use the batch sizes in Table 10-4 along with the number of
gradient descent steps taken for each epoch (see Figure 10-2).

Table 10-4: Minibatch Sizes and the Corresponding
Number of Gradient Descent Steps per Epoch

 Minibatch size   SGD steps per epoch
 2                8,192
 4                4,096
 8                2,048
 16               1,024
 32               512
 64               256
 128              128
 256              64
 512              32
 1,024            16
 2,048            8
 4,096            4
 8,192            2
 16,384           1



    When the minibatch size is 2, over 8,000 gradient descent steps will be
taken per epoch, but when the minibatch size is 8,192, only 2 gradient de-
scent steps are taken. Fixing the number of epochs should favor a smaller




                                                    Experiments with Neural Networks   233
                   minibatch size since there will be correspondingly more gradient descent
                   steps, implying more opportunity to move toward the optimal set of network
                   parameters.
                        Figure 10-3 plots the mean score as a function of the minibatch size.
                   The code that generated the data for the plot is in the mnist_nn_experiments
                   _batch_size.py file. The plotting code itself is in mnist_nn_experiments_batch
                   _size_plot.py. The curve that concerns us for the moment is the one using
                   circles. We’ll explain the square symbol curve shortly.

                                1.00




                                0.95




                                0.90
                   Mean score




                                0.85




                                0.80




                                0.75
                                       0   2000   4000   6000   8000 10000 12000   14000 16000    18000
                                                                Minibatch size

                   Figure 10-3: Average score on the MNIST test set as a function of minibatch size
                   (mean ± SE) for a fixed number of epochs (100) regardless of the minibatch size
                   (circles) or a fixed number of minibatches (squares)

                        Here we’ve fixed the number of epochs at 100, so by varying the mini-
                   batch size, we vary the number of gradient steps: the larger the minibatch,
                   the fewer gradient steps we take. Because the minibatch is larger, the steps
                   themselves are based on a more faithful representation of the actual gradi-
                   ent direction; however, the number of steps is reduced because there are
                   fewer minibatches per epoch, leading to poorer convergence: we are not
                   reaching a good minimum of the loss function.
                        A more “fair” test might be to see what happens when we adjust the
                   number of epochs so that the number of minibatches examined is constant
                   regardless of the minibatch size. One way to do that is to note that the num-
                   ber of minibatches per epoch is n/m, where n is the number of training




234   Chapter 10
        samples, and m is the number of minibatches. If we call the overall number
        of minibatches we want to run M, then, to hold it fixed, we need to set the
        number of epochs to
                                                 Mm
                                            E=
                                                  n

        so that regardless of m, we perform a total of M gradient descent steps dur-
        ing training.
             Let’s keep the same set of minibatches but alter the number of epochs
        according to the preceding equation. We need to select M, the overall num-
        ber of minibatches (gradient descent steps). Let’s set it to M = 8, 192 so
        that the number of epochs is an integer in each case. When the minibatch
        size is 2, we use one epoch to get 8,192 minibatches. And when the mini-
        batch size is 16,384 (n is still also 16,384 samples), we get 8,192 epochs. If we
        do this, we get a completely different set of results, the square symbol curve
        in Figure 10-3, where we see that the mean score is pretty much a constant
        representing the constant number of gradient descent updates performed
        during training. When the minibatch size is small, corresponding to points
        near 0 in Figure 10-3, we do see a degradation in performance, but after a
        certain minibatch size, the performance levels off, reflecting the constant
        number of gradient descent updates combined with a reasonable estimate
        of the true gradient from using a large enough minibatch.
             For the set of base neural network parameters, specifically for a fixed
        learning rate, fixing the number of epochs results in reduced performance
        because of the design of sklearn. Fixing the number of minibatches exam-
        ined results in mainly constant performance.


Base Learning Rate
        In Chapter 9, we introduced the basic equation for updating the weights of a
        neural network during training:

                                         w ← w – η∆w

        Here η (eta) is the learning rate, the parameter that controls the step size
        based on the gradient value, ∆w. In sklearn, η is specified via the learning
        _rate_init parameter. During training, the learning rate is often reduced,
        so that the step sizes get smaller the closer we get to the training minimum
        (hopefully!). For our experiments here, however, we’re using a constant
        learning rate, so whatever value we set learning_rate_init to persists through-
        out the entire training session. Let’s see how this value affects learning.
            For this experiment, we fix the minibatch size at 64 samples and the
        architecture to (1000, 500), meaning two hidden layers with 1,000 and 500
        nodes, respectively. We then look at two main effects. The first is what we




                                                             Experiments with Neural Networks   235
                   get when we fix the number of epochs regardless of the base learning rate.
                   In this case, we’ll always take a set number of gradient descent steps dur-
                   ing training. The second case fixes the product of the base learning rate and
                   the number of epochs. This case is interesting because it looks at the effect
                   on the test score of fewer large steps versus many small steps. The code for
                   these experiments is in mnist_experiments_base_lr.py. The training set is the
                   first 20,000 MNIST samples.
                        The first experiment fixes the epochs at 50 and loops over different base
                   learning rates:

                   [0.2, 0.1, 0.05, 0.01, 0.005, 0.001, 0.0005, 0.0001]

                        The second uses the same base learning rates but varies the number of
                   epochs so that in each case the product of the base learning rate and epochs
                   is 1.5. This leads to the following number of epochs matched to the preced-
                   ing base learning rates:

                   [8, 15, 30, 150, 300, 1500, 3000, 15000]

                        Running the two experiments takes some time. When they’re complete,
                   we can plot the test score as a function of the base learning rate size. Doing
                   this gives us Figure 10-4.

                                0.98


                                0.97


                                0.96


                                0.95
                   Test score




                                0.94


                                0.93


                                0.92


                                0.91 -4
                                   10       10-3               10-2               10-1                   100
                                                         Learning rate (η)


                   Figure 10-4: MNIST test scores as a function of the base learning rate. The circles
                   represent the fixed epochs case. The squares are the fixed product of the base
                   learning rate and the epochs case.

                       Figure 10-4 shows two plots. In the first plot, using circles, the number
                   of epochs was fixed at 50. Fixing the number of epochs fixes the number of

236   Chapter 10
gradient descent steps taken during training. We then vary the learning rate.
The larger the learning rate, the bigger the steps we’ll take.
     Imagine walking over a football field, attempting to get to the very cen-
ter from one of the corners in a limited number of steps. If we take large
steps, we might move over a lot of ground quickly, but we won’t be able
to zero in on the center because we’ll keep stepping past it. If we take tiny
steps, we’ll cover only a short distance from the corner toward the center.
We might be on track, but since we’re allowed only a certain number steps,
we can’t reach the center. Intuitively, we can perhaps convince ourselves
that there is a sweet spot where the step size and the number of steps we get
to take combine to get us to the center.
     We see this effect in the circle plot of Figure 10-4. The leftmost point
represents the case of tiny steps. We do relatively poorly because we haven’t
traversed enough of the error space to find the minimum. Similarly, the
rightmost point represents taking very large steps. We do poorly because
we keep stepping past the minimum. The best score happens when the num-
ber of steps we get to make and the size of those steps work together to move
us to the minimum. In the figure, this happens when the base learning rate
is 0.1.
     Now let’s look at the square symbol plot in Figure 10-4. This plot comes
from the scores found when the product of the base learning rate and the
number of epochs is constant, meaning small learning rates will run for a
large number of epochs. For the most part, the test scores are the same for
all base learning rates except the very largest. In our walking over the foot-
ball field thought experiment, the square symbol plot corresponds to taking
a few large steps or very many small steps. We can imagine both approaches
getting us close to the center of the field, at least until our step size is too
large to let us land at the center.
     Some readers might be objecting at this point. If we compare the first
three points of both the circle and square plots in Figure 10-4, we see a large
gap. For the circles, the performance improves as the base learning rate in-
creases. For the squares, however, the performance remains high and con-
stant regardless of the base learning rate. For the circles, we trained for 50
epochs, always. This is a more significant number of epochs than were used
for the squares plot for the corresponding base learning rates. This means
that in the circles’ case, we stomped around quite a bit after we got near the
center of the field. For the case of the squares, however, we limited the num-
ber of epochs, so we stopped walking when we were near the center of the
field, hence the improved performance. This implies that we need to adjust
the number of epochs (gradient descent steps taken) to match the learning
rate so that we get near to the minimum of the loss function quickly, without
a lot of stomping around, but not so quickly that we are taking large steps
that won’t let us converge on the minimum.
     Thus far we’ve been holding the learning rate constant throughout
training. Because of space considerations, we can’t fully explore the effect
of changing the learning rate during training. Still, we can at least use our
football field thought experiment to help us visualize why changing the


                                                    Experiments with Neural Networks   237
                     learning rate during training makes sense. Recall, the network is initialized
                     intelligently but randomly. This means we start somewhere on the field at
                     random. The odds are low that this arbitrary position is near the center, the
                     minimum of the error surface, so we do need to apply gradient descent to
                     move us closer to the center. At first, we might as well take significant steps
                     to move quickly through the field. Since we are following the gradient, this
                     moves us toward the center. If we keep taking large steps, however, we might
                     overshoot the center. After taking a few large steps, we might think it wise
                     to start taking smaller steps, believing that we are now closer to our goal of
                     reaching the center. The more we walk, the smaller our steps so we can get
                     as close to the center as possible. This is why the learning rate is typically
                     reduced during training.


      Training Set Size
                     We’ve mentioned that the number of samples in the training set affects per-
                     formance significantly. Let’s use the MNIST data to quantify this assertion.
                     For this experiment, we’ll vary the number of training set samples while ad-
                     justing the number of epochs so that in each case, we take (approximately)
                     1,000 gradient descent steps during training. The code for this experiment
                     is in mnist_nn_experiments_samples.py. In all cases, the minibatch size is 100,
                     and the architecture of the network has two hidden layers of 1,000 and 500
                     nodes, respectively. Figure 10-5 shows the results of this experiment.

                                      1.00




                                      0.95




                                      0.90
                    Mean test score




                                      0.85




                                      0.80




                                      0.75
                                             0   5000   10000       15000          20000   25000      30000
                                                           Number of training samples

                     Figure 10-5: MNIST test scores as a function of the number of training samples




238    Chapter 10
             Figure 10-5 is particularly satisfying because it shows exactly what we’d
        expect to see. If we have too little training data, we cannot learn to general-
        ize well because we’re training the model with a very sparse sample from the
        parent distribution. As we add more and more training data, we’d expect a
        potentially rapid rise in the performance of the network since the training
        set is a better and better sample of the parent distribution we’re asking the
        model to learn.
             Figure 10-5 shows that increasing the training set size results in dimin-
        ishing returns. Moving from 1,000 to 5,000 training set samples results in a
        substantial improvement in performance, but moving from 5,000 to even
        10,000 samples gives us only a small performance boost, and further in-
        creases in the training set size level off at some ceiling performance. We can
        think of this level region as having reached some capacity—that the model
        has pretty much learned all it will learn from the dataset. At this point, we
        might think of enlarging the network architecture to see if we get a jump in
        test set scores provided we have enough training samples available.


L2 Regularization
        In Chapter 9, we discussed regularization techniques that improve network
        generalization, including L2 regularization. We saw that L2 regularization,
        which adds a new term to the loss function during training, is functionally
        equivalent to weight decay and penalizes the network during training if the
        weights get large.
             In sklearn, the parameter controlling the strength of L2 regularization is
        alpha. If this parameter is 0, there is no L2 regularization, while the regular-
        ization increases in intensity as alpha increases. Let’s explore the effect of L2
        regularization on our MNIST networks.
             For this experiment, we’ll fix the minibatch size at 64. We’ll also set the
        momentum to 0 so that the effect we see is due to L2 regularization alone.
        Finally, we’ll use a smaller network with two hidden layers of 100 and 50
        nodes each and a small training set of the first 3,000 MNIST samples. The
        code is in mnist_nn_experiments_L2.py.
             Unlike the previous experiments, in this case, we’d like to evaluate the
        test data after each training epoch so that we can watch the network learn
        over the training process. If it is learning, the error on the test set will go
        down as the number of training epochs increases. We know that sklearn will
        loop over all the minibatches in the dataset for one epoch, so we can set the
        number of training epochs to 1. However, if we set max_iter to 1 and then
        call the fit method, the next time we call fit, we’ll start over with a newly
        initialized network. This won’t help us at all; we need to preserve the weights
        and biases between calls to fit.
             Fortunately for us, the creators of sklearn thought ahead and added the
        warm_start parameter. If this parameter is set to True, a call to fit will not re-
        initialize the network but will use the existing weights and biases. If we set




                                                              Experiments with Neural Networks   239
                   max_iter to 1 and warm_start to True, we’ll be able to watch the network learn
                   by calling score after each epoch of training. Calling score gives us the accu-
                   racy on the test data. If we want the error, the value we need to track is 1 –
                   score. This is the value we plot as a function of epoch. The alpha values we’ll
                   plot are

                   [0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4]

                       We’ve made these rather large compared to the default so we can see
                   the effect.
                       Focusing on the test error only, the code for evaluating a single epoch is:

                   def epoch(x_train, y_train, x_test, y_test, clf):
                       clf.fit(x_train, y_train)
                       val_err = 1.0 - clf.score(x_test, y_test)
                       clf.warm_start = True
                       return val_err

                   Here, fit is called to perform one epoch of training. Then we calculate the
                   error on the test set and store it in val_err. Setting warm_start to True after
                   calling fit ensures that the first call to epoch will properly initialize the net-
                   work, but subsequent calls will keep the weights and biases from the previ-
                   ous call.
                        Training then happens in a simple loop:

                   def run(x_train, y_train, x_test, y_test, clf, epochs):
                       val_err = []
                       clf.max_iter = 1
                       for i in range(epochs):
                           verr = epoch(x_train, y_train, x_test, y_test, clf)
                           val_err.append(verr)
                       return val_err

                       This loop collects the per epoch results and returns them to the main
                   function, which itself loops over the α values we’re interested in.
                       Let’s run this code and plot val_err, the test error, as a function of the
                   number of epochs for each alpha. Figure 10-6 is the result.




240   Chapter 10
             0.16


             0.14



Test error   0.12


             0.10                                               no α
                               α = 0.1

             0.08


             0.06
                                                                         α = 0.4

             0.04

                    0   2000             4000            6000             8000               10000
                                                Epochs

Figure 10-6: MNIST test error as a function of training epoch for different values of α

The first thing we notice in Figure 10-6 is that any nonzero value for α pro-
duces a lower test error compared to not using L2 regularization at all. We
can conclude that L2 regularization is helpful. The different α values all
result in approximately the same test error, but larger values are slightly
more effective and reach a lower test error sooner. Compare α = 0.1 to
α = 0.4, for example.
     Notice that larger α values seem noisier: the plot is thicker as the er-
ror jumps around more, relative to the smaller α values. To understand
this, think about the total loss minimized during training. When α is large,
we’re placing more importance on the L2 term relative to the network’s er-
ror over the minibatch. This means that when we ask the network to adjust
the weights and biases during backprop, it’ll be more strongly affected by
the magnitude of the parameters of the network than the training data itself.
Because the network is focusing less on reducing the loss due to the training
data, we might expect the per epoch test error to vary more.




                                                                  Experiments with Neural Networks   241
      Momentum
                    Momentum alters the weight update during training by adding in a frac-
                    tion of the gradient value used to update the weight in the previous mini-
                    batch. The fraction is specified as a multiplier on the previous gradient
                    value, [0, 1]. We covered momentum in Chapter 9.
                         Let’s see how changing this parameter affects training. In this case, the
                    setup for the experiment is simple. It’s identical to the approach used previ-
                    ously for L2 regularization, but instead of fixing the momentum parameter
                    (µ) and varying the L2 weight (α), we’ll fix α = 0.0001 and vary µ. All the
                    other parts remain the same: training by single epochs, the network configu-
                    ration, and so forth. See the file mnist_nn_experiments_momentum.py.
                         We’ll explore these momentum values:

                    [0.0, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9, 0.99]

                         They range from no momentum term (µ = 0) to a large momentum
                    term (µ = 0.99). Running the experiment produces Figure 10-7.
                         In Figure 10-7, we see three distinct regions. The first, represented by
                    no momentum or relatively small momentum values (µ = 0.3, µ = 0.5),
                    shows the highest test set error. The second shows improvement with mod-
                    erate momentum values (µ = 0.7, µ = 0.9), including the “standard” (sklearn
                    default) value of 0.9. In this case, however, a large momentum of 0.99 low-
                    ers the test set error from about 7.5 percent to about 6 percent. Momentum
                    helps and should be used, especially with values near the standard of 0.9.
                    In practice, people seldom seem to alter the momentum much, but as this
                    example shows, sometimes it makes a big difference to the results.

                                 0.10




                                 0.09                   µ = 0.5
                                            µ = 0.0                               µ = 0.3



                                 0.08
                    Test error




                                                        µ = 0.7                   µ = 0.9
                                 0.07




                                 0.06

                                                                       µ = 0.99

                                 0.05
                                        0      2000     4000               6000             8000     10000
                                                                  Epochs

                    Figure 10-7: MNIST test error as a function of training epoch for different values of µ

242    Chapter 10
              Note that we severely limited the training set to a mere 3,000 samples,
         about 300 per digit, which likely made momentum matter more because the
         training set was a small and less complete of a sample of the parent distribu-
         tion we want the model to learn. Increasing the training set size to 30,000
         results in a different, and more typical, ordering of the plot, where a mo-
         mentum of 0.9 is the best option.


Weight Initialization
         Once treated rather cavalierly, the initial set of values used for the weights
         and biases of a network is now known to be extremely important. The sim-
         ple experiment of this section shows this plainly.
              The sklearn toolkit initializes the weights and biases of a neural network
         by calling the _init_coef method of the MLPClassifier class. This method se-
         lects weights and biases randomly according to the Glorot algorithm we dis-
         cussed in Chapter 9. This algorithm sets the weights and biases to values
         sampled uniformly from the range
                                   [ √                 √            ]
                                              A              A
                                     –               ,
                                          fin + fout     fin + fout

         where fin is the number of inputs and fout is the number of outputs for the
         current layer being initialized. If the activation function is a sigmoid, A = 2;
         otherwise, A = 6.
              If we play a little trick, we can change the way that sklearn initializes the
         network and thereby experiment with alternative initialization schemes.
         The trick uses Python’s object-oriented programming abilities. If we make
         a subclass of MLPClassifier, let’s call it simply Classifier, we can override the
         _init_coef method with our own. Python also allows us to add new member
         variables to a class instance arbitrarily, which gives us all we need.
              The remainder of the experiment follows the format of the previous
         sections. We’ll ultimately plot the test error by epoch of the MNIST digits
         trained on a subset of the full data for different initialization approaches.
         The model itself will use the first 6,000 training samples, a minibatch size of
         64, a constant learning rate of 0.01, a momentum of 0.9, an L2 regulariza-
         tion parameter of 0.2, and an architecture with two hidden layers of 100 and
         50 nodes each. See mnist_nn_experiments_init.py for this experiment’s code.
              We’ll test four new weight initialization schemes along with the standard
         Glorot approach of sklearn. The schemes are shown in Table 10-5.




                                                               Experiments with Neural Networks   243
                    Table 10-5: Weight Initialization Schemes

                     Name        Equation                                Description
                                 [ √                 √               ]
                     Glorot        –       6                 6           sklearn default
                                       fin +fout ,       fin +fout
                                          √
                     He          N(0,1)        2                         He initialization for ReLU
                                              fin
                                          √
                     Xavier      N(0,1)        1                         Alternate Xavier
                                              fin

                     Uniform     0.01(U(0,1)-0.5)                        Classic small uniform
                     Gaussian    0.005N(0,1)                             Classic small Gaussian


                    Recall that N(0, 1) refers to a sample from a bell curve with a mean of 0 and
                    a standard deviation of 1 while U(0, 1) refers to a sample drawn uniformly
                    from [0, 1), meaning all values in that range are equally likely except 1.0.
                    Each of the new initialization methods sets the bias values to 0, always. How-
                    ever, sklearn’s Glorot implementation sets the bias values in the same way it
                    sets the weights.

      NOTE          As mentioned in Chapter 9, both Xavier and Glorot refer to the same person, Xavier
                    Glorot. We’re differentiating here because the form we’re calling Xavier is referred to
                    as such in other machine learning toolkits like Caffe, and the equation used is differ-
                    ent from the equation used in the original paper.

                        This all sounds nice and neat, but how to implement it in code? First,
                    we define a new Python class, Classifier, which is a subclass of MLPClassifier.
                    As a subclass, the new class immediately inherits all the functionality of the
                    superclass (MLPClassifier) while allowing us the freedom to override any of
                    the superclass methods with our own implementation. We simply need to
                    define our own version of _init_coef with the same arguments and return
                    values. In code, it looks like this:

                    class Classifier(MLPClassifier):
                        def _init_coef(self, fan_in, fan_out):
                            if (self.init_scheme == 0):
                                return super(Classifier, self)._init_coef(fan_in, fan_out)
                            elif (self.init_scheme == 1):
                                weights = 0.01*(np.random.random((fan_in, fan_out))-0.5)
                                biases = np.zeros(fan_out)
                            elif (self.init_scheme == 2):
                                weights = 0.005*(np.random.normal(size=(fan_in, fan_out)))
                                biases = np.zeros(fan_out)
                            elif (self.init_scheme == 3):
                                weights = np.random.normal(size=(fan_in, fan_out))* \
                                            np.sqrt(2.0/fan_in)
                                biases = np.zeros(fan_out)
                            elif (self.init_scheme == 4):
                                weights = np.random.normal(size=(fan_in, fan_out))* \


244    Chapter 10
                        np.sqrt(1.0/fan_in)
            biases = np.zeros(fan_out)

     The initialization we perform depends on the value of init_scheme. This
is a new member variable that we use to select the initialization method (see
Table 10-6).

Table 10-6: Initialization Scheme and
init_scheme Value

 Value    Initialization method
 0        sklearn default
 1        Classic small uniform
 2        Classic small Gaussian
 3        He initialization
 4        Alternate Xavier


We set the variable immediately after creating the Classifier object.
     We know that training a network more than once results in slightly dif-
ferent performance because of the way the network is initialized. There-
fore, training a single network for each initialization type will likely lead to
a wrong view of how well the initialization performs because we might hit a
bad set of initial weights and biases. To mitigate this, we need to train mul-
tiple versions of the network and report the average performance. Since
we want to plot the test error as a function of the training epoch, we need
to track the test error at each epoch for each training of each initialization
scheme. This suggests a three-dimensional array:

test_err = np.zeros((trainings, init_types, epochs))

    We have trainings trainings of each initialization type (init_types) for a
maximum of epochs epochs.
    With all of this in place, the generation and storage of the actual experi-
ment output is straightforward, if rather slow, taking the better part of a day
to run:

for i in range(trainings):
    for k in range(init_types):
        nn = Classifier(solver="sgd", verbose=False, tol=0,
               nesterovs_momentum=False, early_stopping=False,
               learning_rate_init=0.01, momentum=0.9,
               hidden_layer_sizes=(100,50), activation="relu", alpha=0.2,
               learning_rate="constant", batch_size=64, max_iter=1)
        nn.init_scheme = k
        test_err[i,k,:] = run(x_train, y_train, x_test, y_test, nn, epochs)
np.save("mnist_nn_experiments_init_results.npy", test_err)




                                                     Experiments with Neural Networks   245
                        Here nn is the classifier instance to train, init_scheme sets the initializa-
                   tion scheme to use, and run is the function we defined earlier to train and
                   test the network incrementally.
                        If we set the number of training sessions to 10, the number of epochs to
                   4,000, and plot the mean test error per epoch, we get Figure 10-8.


                                0.054


                                0.052


                                0.050

                                                           Gaussian
                   Test error




                                0.048


                                0.046            Uniform
                                                                       Xavier

                                0.044

                                        Glorot             He
                                0.042


                                0.040
                                        500         100         1500     2000     2500   3000   3500   4000
                                                                         Epochs

                   Figure 10-8: MNIST test error as a function of training epoch for different weight
                   initialization methods (mean over 10 training runs)

                        Let’s understand what the figure is showing us. The five initialization
                   approaches are marked, each pointing to one of the five curves in the figure.
                   The curves themselves are familiar to us by now; they show the test set error
                   as a function of the training epoch. In this case, the value plotted for each
                   curve is the average over 10 training runs of the same network architecture
                   initialized with the same approach but different random values.
                        We immediately see two distinct groups of results. On the top, we have
                   the test error for the classic initialization approaches using small uniform
                   or normally distributed values (Gaussian). On the bottom, we have the re-
                   sults for the more principled initialization in current use. Even this basic
                   experiment shows the effectiveness of modern initialization approaches
                   quite clearly. Recall, the classic approaches were part of the reason neural
                   networks had a bad name a few decades ago. Networks were finicky and dif-
                   ficult to train in large part because of improper initialization.
                        Looking at the bottom set of results, we see that for this experiment,
                   there is little difference between the sklearn default initialization, which we
                   are calling Glorot, and the initialization approach of He. The two plots are




246   Chapter 10
        virtually identical. The plot labeled Xavier is slightly worse at first , but to-
        ward the end of our training runs matches the other two. Sklearn is using a
        good initialization strategy.
             The plot also shows us something else. For the classic initialization ap-
        proaches, we see the test set error level off and remain more or less con-
        stant. For the modern initialization approaches, we observe the test error
        increase slightly with the training epoch. This is particularly true for the Glo-
        rot and He methods. This increase is a telltale sign of overfitting: as we keep
        training, the model stops learning general features of the parent distribution
        and starts to focus on specific features of the training set. We didn’t plot the
        training set error, but it would be going down even as the test set error starts
        to rise. The lowest test set error is at about 1,200 epochs. Ideally, this would
        be where we stop training because we have the most reliable evidence that
        the model is in a good place to correctly predict new, unseen inputs. Further
        training tends to degrade model generalization.
             Why did the increase in the test error happen? The likely cause of this
        effect is too small of a training set, only 6,000 samples. Also, the model ar-
        chitecture is not very large, with only 100 and 50 nodes in the hidden layers.
             This section dramatically demonstrates the benefit of using current,
        state-of-the-art network initialization. When we explore convolutional neu-
        ral networks in Chapter 12, we’ll use these approaches exclusively.


Feature Ordering
        We’ll end our MNIST experiments with a bit of fun that we’ll return to again
        when we’re exploring convolutional neural networks. All of the experiments
        so far use the MNIST digits as a vector made by laying the rows of the digit
        images end to end. When we do this, we know that the elements of the vec-
        tor are related to each other in a way that will reconstruct the digit should
        we take the vector and reshape it into a 28 × 28 element array. This means,
        except for the end of one row and the beginning of the next, that the pixels
        in the row are still part of the digit—the spatial relationship of the compo-
        nents of the image is preserved.
             However, if we scramble the pixels of the image, but always scramble the
        pixels in the same way, we’ll destroy the local spatial relationship between
        the pixels. This local relationship is what we use when we look at the im-
        age to decide what digit it represents. We look for the top part of a 5 to be
        a straight line segment and the bottom portion to curve on the right side,
        and so forth.
             Look at Figure 7-3. The figure shows MNIST digit images on the top
        row and what the same digit images look like after scrambling (bottom). In
        Chapter 7, we showed that this scrambling does not affect the accuracy of
        classic machine learning models; the models consider the inputs holistically,
        not by local spatial relationships as we do. Is this true for neural networks
        as well? Also, if true, will the network learn as quickly with the scrambled
        inputs as it does with the original images? Let’s find out.



                                                             Experiments with Neural Networks   247
                        The code for this experiment is found in mnist_nn_experiments_scrambled
                   .py, where we simply define our now expected neural network model

                   MLPClassifier(solver="sgd", verbose=False, tol=0,
                     nesterovs_momentum=False, early_stopping=False,
                     learning_rate_init=0.01, momentum=0.9,
                     hidden_layer_sizes=(100,50), activation="relu",
                     alpha=0.2, learning_rate="constant", batch_size=64, max_iter=1)

                   and train it on the first 6,000 MNIST digit samples—first as usual, and then
                   using the scrambled versions. We compute the test set error as a function of
                   the epoch and average the results over 10 runs before plotting. The result is
                   Figure 10-9.


                                0.054


                                0.052


                                0.050
                   Test error




                                0.048

                                                Scrambled
                                0.046


                                0.044

                                                Unscrambled
                                0.042


                                0.040
                                        500   100    1500     2000     2500    3000      3500        4000
                                                              Epochs

                   Figure 10-9: MNIST test error as a function of training epoch for scrambled and
                   unscrambled digits

                        In the figure, we see the answer to our earlier questions. First, yes, tra-
                   ditional neural networks do interpret their input vectors holistically, like
                   the classic models. Second, yes, the network learns just as rapidly with the
                   scrambled digits as it does with the unscrambled ones. The difference be-
                   tween the scrambled and unscrambled curves in Figure 10-9 is not statisti-
                   cally significant.




248   Chapter 10
          These results indicate that (traditional) neural networks “understand”
      their inputs in their entirety and do not look for local spatial relationships.
      We’ll see a different outcome to this experiment when we work with con-
      volutional neural networks (Chapter 12). It’s precisely this lack of spatial
      awareness (assuming images as inputs) that limited neural networks for so
      long and led to the development of convolutional neural networks, which
      are spatially aware.


Summary
      In this chapter, we explored the concepts developed in Chapters 8 and 9
      via experiments with the MNIST dataset. By varying key parameters associ-
      ated with the network architecture and gradient descent learning process,
      we increased our intuition as to how the parameters influence the overall
      performance of the network. Space considerations prevented us from thor-
      oughly exploring all the MLPClassifier options, so I encourage you to experi-
      ment more on your own. In particular, experiment with using the different
      solvers, Nesterov momentum, early stopping, and, particularly crucial for
      training convolutional neural networks, nonconstant learning rates.
           The next chapter explores techniques and metrics for evaluating the
      performance of machine learning models. This interlude before we jump to
      convolutional neural networks will supply us with tools we can use to help
      understand the performance of more advanced model types.




                                                           Experiments with Neural Networks   249
