    TRAINING A NEURAL NETWORK
                                 9
              In this chapter, we’ll discuss how to train
             a neural network. We’ll look at the stan-
           dard approaches and tricks being used in
        the field today. There will be some math, some
hand-waving, and a whole host of new terms and con-
cepts. But you don’t need to follow the math at a deep
level: we’ll gloss over things as needed to get the main
point across.
     This chapter is perhaps the most challenging in the book, at least con-
ceptually. It certainly is mathematically. While it’s crucially important to
building intuition and understanding, sometimes we get impatient and like
to dive into things first to test the waters. Thanks to preexisting libraries, we
can do that here. If you want to play around with neural networks before
learning how they work, jump to Chapter 10 before coming back here to fill
in the theory. But do come back.
     It’s possible to learn to use powerful toolkits like sklearn and Keras with-
out understanding how they work. That approach should not satisfy anyone,
though the temptation is real. Understanding how these algorithms work is
well worth your time.
      A High-Level Overview
                   Let’s begin this chapter with an overview of the concepts we’ll discuss. Read
                   it, but don’t fret if the concepts are unclear. Instead, try to get a feel for the
                   overall process.
                        The first step in training a neural network is selecting intelligent initial
                   values for the weights and biases. We then use gradient descent to modify
                   these weights and biases so that we reduce the error over the training set.
                   We’ll use the average value of the loss function to measure the error, which
                   tells us how wrong the network currently is. We know if the network is right
                   or wrong because we have the expected output for each input sample in the
                   training set (the class label).
                        Gradient descent is an algorithm that requires gradients. For now, think
                   of gradients as measures of steepness. The larger the gradient, the steeper
                   the function is at that point. To use gradient descent to search for the small-
                   est value of the loss function, we need to be able to find gradients. For that,
                   we’ll use backpropagation. This is the fundamental algorithm of neural net-
                   works, the one that allows them to learn successfully. It gives us the gra-
                   dients we need by starting at the output of the network and moving back
                   through the network toward the input. Along the way, it calculates the gradi-
                   ent value for each weight and bias.
                        With the gradient values, we can use the gradient descent algorithm to
                   update the weights and biases so that the next time we pass the training sam-
                   ples through the network, the average of the loss function will be less than it
                   was before. In other words, our network will be less wrong. This is the goal
                   of training, and we hope it results in a network that has learned general fea-
                   tures of the data.
                        Learning general features of the dataset requires regularization. There
                   are many approaches to regularization, and we’ll discuss the main ones.
                   Without regularization, the training process is in danger of overfitting, and
                   we could end up with a network that doesn’t generalize. But with regulariza-
                   tion, we can be successful and get a useful model.
                        So, the following sections introduce gradient descent, backpropaga-
                   tion, loss functions, weight initialization, and, finally, regularization. These
                   are the main components of successful neural network training. We don’t
                   need to understand these in all their gory mathematical details; instead,
                   we need to understand them conceptually so we can build an intuitive ap-
                   proach to what it means to train a neural network. With this intuition, we’ll
                   be able to make meaningful use of the parameters that sklearn and Keras
                   give us for training.


      Gradient Descent
                   The standard way to train a neural network is to use gradient descent.
                        Let’s parse the phrase gradient descent. We already know what the word
                   descent means. It means to go down from somewhere higher up. What about
                   gradient? The short answer is that a gradient indicates how quickly some-
                   thing changes with respect to how fast something else changes. Measuring

190    Chapter 9
how much one thing changes as another changes is something we’re all fa-
miliar with. We all know about speed, which is how position changes as time
changes. We even say it in words: miles per hour or kilometers per hour.
    You’re probably already familiar with the gradient in another context.
Consider the equation of a line

                                        y = mx + b

where m is the slope and b is the y-axis intercept. The slope is how quickly
the line’s y position changes with each change in the x position. If we know
two points that are on the line, (x0 , y0 ) and (x1 , y1 ), then we can calculate the
slope as
                                            y0 – y1
                                       m=
                                            x0 – x1

which, in words, we might say as “y’s per x.” It’s a measure of how steep or
shallow the line is: its gradient. In mathematics, we often talk about a change
in a variable, and the notation for that is to put a ∆ (delta) in front. So, we
might write the slope of a line as

                                                 ∆y
                                         m=
                                                 ∆x
to drive home the point that the slope is the change in y for each change in
x. Fortunately for us, it turns out that not only do lines have a slope at each
point, but also most functions have a slope at each point. However, except
for straight lines, this slope changes from point to point. A picture will help
here. Consider Figure 9-1.

                A




                                             B




                                                                              D


                                                      C


Figure 9-1: A function with several tangent lines indicated
                                                              Training a Neural Network   191
                       The graph in Figure 9-1 is of a polynomial. Notice the lines drawn on
                  the figure that are just touching the function. These are tangent lines. And
                  as lines, they have a slope we can see in the plot. Now imagine moving one
                  of the lines over the function so that it continues to touch the function at
                  only one point; imagine how the slope of the line changes as it moves.
                       It turns out that how the slope changes over the function is itself a func-
                  tion, and it’s called the derivative. Given a function and x value, the deriva-
                  tive tells us the slope of the function at that point, x. The fact that functions
                  have derivatives is a fundamental insight of calculus, and of fundamental
                  importance to us.
                       The notion of a derivative is essential because for single variable func-
                  tions, the derivative at the point x is the gradient at x; it’s the direction in
                  which the function is changing. If we want to find the minimum of the
                  function, the x that gives us the smallest y, we want to move in the direction
                  opposite to the gradient as that will move us in the direction of the minimum.
                       The derivative is written in many different ways, but the way that echoes
                  the idea of the slope, how y changes for a change in x, is
                                                         dy
                                                         dx

                      We’ll return to this form next when discussing the backpropagation al-
                  gorithm. That’s it for the gradient; now let’s take a closer look at descent.


                  Finding Minimums
                  Since we want a model that makes few mistakes, we need to find the set of
                  parameters that lead to a small value for the loss function. In other words,
                  we need to find a minimum of the loss function.
                       Look again at Figure 9-1. The minimum is on the right, where tangent
                  line C is. We can see it’s the minimum, and notice that the gradient is 0
                  there. This tells us we’re at a minimum (or maximum). If we start at B, we
                  see that the slope of the tangent line is negative (down and to the right).
                  Therefore, we need to move to an x value in the positive direction because
                  this is opposite to the sign of the gradient. Doing this will take us closer to
                  the minimum at C. Similarly, if we start at D, the slope of the tangent line
                  is positive (up and to the right) meaning we need to move in the negative x
                  direction, again toward C, to move closer to the minimum. All of this hints
                  at an algorithm for finding the minimum of a function: pick a starting point
                  (an x value) and use the gradient to move to a lower point.
                       For simple functions of just x, like those of Figure 9-1, this approach will
                  work nicely, assuming we start in a good place like B or D. When we move
                  to more than one dimension, it turns out that this approach will still work
                  nicely provided we start in a good place with our initial guess.
                       Working still with Figure 9-1 and assuming we’re starting at B, we see
                  that the gradient tells us to move to the right, toward C. But how do we se-
                  lect the next x value to consider, to move us closer to C? This is the step size,



192   Chapter 9
and it tells us how big a jump we make from one x position to the next. Step
size is a parameter we have to choose, and in practice this value, called the
learning rate, is often fluid and gets smaller and smaller as we move, under
the assumption that as we move, we get closer and closer to the minimum
value and therefore need smaller and smaller steps.
     This is all well and good, even intuitive, but we have a small problem.
What if instead of starting at B or D, we start at A? The gradient at A is point-
ing us to the left, not the right. In this case, our simple algorithm will fail—it
will move us to the left, and we’ll never reach C. The figure shows only one
minimum, at C, but we can easily imagine a second minimum, say to the left
of A, that doesn’t go as low (doesn’t have as small a y value) as C. If we start
at A, we’ll move toward this minimum, and not the one at C. Our algorithm
will fall into a local minimum. Once in, our algorithm can’t get us out, and we
won’t be able to find the global minimum at C. We’ll see that this is a gen-
uine issue for neural networks, but one that for modern deep networks is,
almost magically, not much of an issue after all.
     So how does all of this help us train a neural network? The gradient tells
us how a small change in x changes y. If x is one of the parameters of our
network and y is the error given by the loss function, then the gradient tells
us how much a change in that parameter affects the overall error of the net-
work. Once we know that, we’re in a position to modify the parameter by an
amount based on the gradient, and we know that this will move us toward a
minimum error. When the error over the training set is at a minimum, we
can claim that the network has been trained.
     Let’s talk a bit more about the gradients and parameters. All of our dis-
cussion to this point, based on Figure 9-1, has been rather one-dimensional;
our functions are functions of x only. We talked about changing one thing,
the position along the x-axis, to see how it affects the y position. In reality,
we’re not working with just one dimension. Every weight and bias in our
network is a parameter, and the loss function value depends upon all of
them. For the simple network in Figure 8-1 alone, there are 20 parameters,
meaning that the loss function is a 20-dimensional function. Regardless, our
approach remains much the same: if we know the gradient for each param-
eter, we can still apply our algorithm in an attempt to locate a set of parame-
ters minimizing the loss.


Updating the Weights
We’ll talk about how to get gradient values in a bit, but for the time being
let’s assume we have them already. We’ll say that we have a set of numbers
that tells us how, given the current configuration of the network, a change
in any weight or bias value changes the loss. With that knowledge, we can
apply gradient descent: we adjust the weight or bias by some fraction of that
gradient value to move us, collectively, toward a minimum of the entire loss
function.




                                                          Training a Neural Network   193
                        Mathematically, we update each weight and bias using a simple rule:

                                                         w ← w – η∆w
                   Here w is one of the weights (or biases), η (eta) is the learning rate (the step
                   size), and ∆w is the gradient value.
                        Listing 9-1 gives an algorithm for training a neural network using gradi-
                   ent descent.

                   1. Pick some intelligent starting values for the weights and biases.
                   2. Run the training set through the network using its current weights and
                   biases and calculate the average loss.
                   3. Use this loss to get the gradient for each weight and bias.
                   4. Update the weight or bias value by the step size times the gradient value.
                   5. Repeat from step 2 until the loss is low enough.

                   Listing 9-1: Gradient descent in five (deceptively) simple steps

                        The algorithm appears simple, but as they say, the devil is in the de-
                   tails. We have to make choices at every step, and every choice we make will
                   prompt further questions. For example, step 1 says to “Pick some intelligent
                   starting values.” What should they be? It turns out that successfully training
                   a neural network depends critically on choosing good initial values. We al-
                   ready saw how this might be so in our preceding example using Figure 9-1
                   where if we start at A, we won’t find the minimum at C. Much research has
                   been conducted over the years related to step 1.
                        Step 2 is straightforward; it’s the forward-pass through the network. We
                   haven’t talked in detail about the loss function itself; for now, just think of it
                   as a function measuring the effectiveness of the network on the training set.
                        Step 3 is a black box for the time being. We’ll explore how to do it short-
                   ly. For now, assume we can find the gradient values for each parameter.
                        Step 4 follows the form of the previous equation that moves the param-
                   eter from its current value to one that will reduce the overall loss. In prac-
                   tice, the simple form of this equation is not sufficient; there are other terms,
                   like momentum, that preserve some fraction of the previous weight change
                   for the next iteration (next pass of the training data through the network)
                   so that parameters do not change too wildly. We’ll revisit momentum later.
                   For now, let’s look at a variation of gradient descent, the one that is actually
                   used to train deep networks.


      Stochastic Gradient Descent
                   The previous steps describe gradient descent training of a neural network.
                   As we might expect, in practice there are many different flavors of this ba-
                   sic idea. One that’s in widespread use and works well empirically is called
                   stochastic gradient descent (SGD). The word stochastic refers to a random pro-
                   cess. We’ll see next why the word stochastic goes before gradient descent in
                   this case.


194    Chapter 9
Batches and Minibatches
Step 2 of Listing 9-1 says to run the complete training set through the net-
work using the current values of the weights and biases. This approach is
called batch training, so named because we use all of the training data to es-
timate the gradients. Intuitively, this is a reasonable thing to do: we’ve care-
fully constructed the training set to be a fair representation of the unknown
parent process that generates the data, and it’s this parent process we want
the network to successfully model for us.
     If our dataset is small, like the original iris dataset of Chapter 5, then
batch training makes sense. But what if our training dataset isn’t small?
What if it’s hundreds of thousands or even millions of samples? We’ll be
facing longer and longer training times.
     We’ve run into a problem. We want a large training set as that will
(hopefully) better represent the unknown parent process that we want to
model. But the larger the training set, the longer it takes to pass each sam-
ple through the network, get an average value for the loss, and update the
weights and biases. We call passing the entire training set through the net-
work an epoch, and we’ll need many dozens to hundreds of epochs to train
the network. Doing a better job of representing the thing we want to model
means longer and longer computation times because of all the samples that
must be passed through the network.
     This is where SGD comes into play. Instead of using all the training data
on each pass, let’s alternatively select a small subset of the training data and
use the average loss calculated from it to update the parameters. We’ll calcu-
late an “incorrect” gradient value because we’re estimating the loss over the
full training set using only a small sample, but we’ll save a lot of time.
     Let’s see how this sampling plays out with a simple example. We’ll de-
fine a vector of 100 random bytes using NumPy:

>>> d = np.random.normal(128,20,size=100).astype("uint8")
>>> d
130, 141, 99, 106, 135, 119, 98, 147, 152, 163, 118, 149, 122,
133, 115, 128, 176, 132, 173, 145, 152, 79, 124, 133, 158, 111,
139, 140, 126, 117, 175, 123, 154, 115, 130, 108, 139, 129, 113,
129, 123, 135, 112, 146, 125, 134, 141, 136, 155, 152, 101, 149,
137, 119, 143, 136, 118, 161, 138, 112, 124, 86, 135, 161, 112,
117, 145, 140, 123, 110, 163, 122, 105, 135, 132, 145, 121, 92,
118, 125, 154, 148, 92, 142, 118, 128, 128, 129, 125, 121, 139,
152, 122, 128, 126, 126, 157, 124, 120, 152

    Here the byte values are normally distributed around a mean of 128.
The actual mean of the 100 values is 130.9. Selecting subsets of these values,
10 at a time, gives us an estimate of the actual mean value

>>> i = np.argsort(np.random.random(100))
>>> d[i[:10]].mean()
138.9



                                                         Training a Neural Network   195
                  with repeated subsets leading to estimated means of 135.7, 131.7, 134.2,
                  128.1, and so forth.
                       None of the estimated means are the actual mean, but they are all close
                  to it. If we can estimate the mean from a random subset of the full dataset,
                  we can see by analogy that we should be able to estimate the gradients of
                  the loss function with a subset of the full training set. Since the sample is
                  randomly selected, the resulting gradient values are randomly varying esti-
                  mates. This is why we add the word stochastic in front of gradient descent.
                       Because passing the full training set through the network on each weight
                  and bias update step is known as batch training, passing a subset through is
                  known as minibatch training. You will hear people use the term minibatch
                  quite frequently. A minibatch is the subset of the training data used for each
                  stochastic gradient descent step. Training is usually some number of epochs,
                  where the relationship between epochs and minibatches is as follows:
                                         (                                )
                                           number of training set samples
                               1 epoch =                                    minibatches
                                                  minibatch size

                       In practice, we don’t really want to select the minibatches at random
                  from the full training set. If we do that, we run the risk of not using all the
                  samples: some might never be selected, and others might be selected too
                  often. Typically, we randomize the order of the training samples and select
                  fixed-size blocks of samples sequentially whenever a minibatch is required.
                  When all available training samples are used, we can shuffle the full training
                  set order and repeat the process. Some deep learning toolkits don’t even do
                  this; they instead cycle through the same set of minibatches again.


                  Convex vs. Nonconvex Functions
                  SGD sounds like a concession to practicality. In theory, it seems that we’d
                  never want to use it, and we might expect that our training results will suffer
                  because of it. However, the opposite is generally true. In some sense, gradi-
                  ent descent training of a neural network shouldn’t work at all because we’re
                  applying an algorithm meant for convex functions to one that is nonconvex.
                  Figure 9-2 illustrates the difference between a convex function and a non-
                  convex function.
                  1.8                                            1.2

                                                                 1.0
                  1.6
                                                                 0.8

                  1.4                                            0.6
                                                                 0.4
                  1.2
                                                                 0.2

                  1.0                                            0.0
                                                                –0.2
                    0.0     0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8     1.0    0.0     0.2     0.4     0.6    0.8   1.0

                  Figure 9-2: A convex function of x (left). A nonconvex function of x (right).
196   Chapter 9
     A convex function is such that a line segment between any two points on
the function does not cross the function at any other point. The black line
on the left of Figure 9-2 is one example, and any such segment will not cross
the function at any other point, indicating that this is a convex function.
However, the same can’t be said of the curve on the right of Figure 9-2. This
is the curve from Figure 9-1. Here the black line does cross the function.
     Gradient descent is designed to find the minimum when the function is
convex, and because it relies only on the gradient, the first derivative, it’s
sometimes known as a first-order optimization method. Gradient descent
should not work, in general, with nonconvex functions because it runs the
risk of getting trapped in a local minimum instead of finding the global min-
imum. Again, we saw this with the example in Figure 9-1.
     Here’s where stochastic gradient descent helps. In multiple dimensions,
the gradient will point in a direction that isn’t necessarily toward the nearest
minimum of the loss function. This means that our step will be in a slightly
wrong direction, but that somewhat wrong direction might help us avoid
getting trapped somewhere we don’t want to be.
     The situation is more complicated, of course, and more mysterious. The
machine learning community has been struggling with the contradiction
between the obvious success of using first-order optimization on the non-
convex loss function and the fact that it shouldn’t work at all.
     Two ideas are emerging. The first is what we just stated, that stochastic
gradient descent helps by actually moving us in a slightly wrong direction.
The second idea, which seems to be pretty much proven now, is that, for the
loss functions used in deep learning, it turns out that there are many, many
local minimums and that these are all basically the same, so that landing in
almost any one of them will result in a network that performs well.
     Some researchers argue that most gradient descent learning winds up
on a saddle point; this is a place that looks like a minimum but isn’t. Imagine
a saddle for a horse and place a marble in the middle. The marble will sit in
place, but you could push the marble in a certain direction and have it roll
off the saddle. The argument, not without some justification, is that most
training ends on a saddle point, and better results are possible with a bet-
ter algorithm. Again, however, even the saddle point, if it is one, is still for
practical purposes a good place to be, so the model is successful regardless.
     In practice, then, we should use stochastic gradient descent because it
leads to better overall learning and reduces the training time by not requir-
ing full batches. It does introduce a new hyperparameter, the minibatch size,
that we must select at some point before training.


Ending Training
We haven’t yet discussed a critical question: when should we stop training?
Remember that in Chapter 5, we went through some effort to create train-
ing sets, validation sets, and test sets. This is where we’ll use the validation
sets. While training, we can use the accuracy, or some other metric, on the
validation set to decide when to stop. If using SGD, we typically run the val-
idation set through the network for each minibatch or set of minibatches to

                                                          Training a Neural Network   197
                  compute the accuracy. By tracking the accuracy on the validation set, we can
                  decide when to stop training.
                       If we train for a long time, eventually two things usually happen. The
                  first is that the error on the training set goes toward zero; we get better and
                  better on the training set. The second is that the error on the validation set
                  goes down and then, eventually, starts to go back up.
                       These effects are due to overfitting. The training error goes down and
                  down as the model learns more and more to represent the parent distribu-
                  tion that generated the dataset. But, eventually, it will stop learning general
                  things about the training set. At this point, we’re overfitting, and we want
                  to stop training because the model is no longer learning general features
                  and is instead learning minutiae about the particular training set we’re us-
                  ing. We can watch for this by using the validation set while training. Since
                  we don’t use the samples in the validation set to update the weights and bi-
                  ases of the network, it should give us a fair test of the current state of the
                  network. When overfitting starts, the error on the validation set will begin
                  to go up from a minimum value. What we can do then is to keep the weights
                  and biases that produced the minimum value on the validation set and claim
                  that those represent the best model.
                       We don’t want to use any data that has influenced training to measure
                  the final effectiveness of our network. We use the validation set to decide
                  when to stop training, so characteristics of the samples in the validation set
                  have also influenced the final model; this means we can’t strongly rely on
                  the validation set to give us an idea of how the model will behave on new
                  data. It’s only the held-out test set, unused until we declare victory over
                  training, that gives us some idea of how we might expect the model to per-
                  form on data in the wild. So, just as it is anathema to report training set ac-
                  curacy as a measure of how good the model is, it’s also anathema to report
                  the validation set accuracy.


                  Updating the Learning Rate
                  In our generic update equation for changing the weights and biases based
                  on the gradient, we introduced a hyperparameter, η (eta), the learning rate
                  or step size. It’s a scale factor indicating how much we should update the
                  weight or bias based on the gradient value.
                       We previously stated that the learning rate doesn’t need to be fixed and
                  that it could, and even should, get smaller and smaller as we train under the
                  assumption that we need smaller and smaller steps to get to the actual min-
                  imum value of the loss function. We didn’t state how we should actually up-
                  date the learning rate.




198   Chapter 9
     There’s more than one way to update the step size, but some are more
helpful than others. The MLPClassifier class of sklearn, which uses SGD
solvers, has three options. The first is to never change the learning rate—
just leave η at its initial value, η0 . The second is to scale η so that it decreases
with epochs (minibatches) according to
                                            η0
                                       η=
                                            tp
where η0 is set by the user, t is the iteration (epoch, minibatch), and p is an
exponent √on t, also picked by the user. The sklearn default p is 0.5—that is,
scale by t, which seems a reasonable default.
      The third option is to adapt the learning rate by watching the loss func-
tion value. As long as the loss is decreasing, leave the learning rate where
it is. When the loss stops decreasing for a set number of minibatches, di-
vide the learning rate by some value like 5, the sklearn default. If we never
change the learning rate, and it’s too large, we might end up moving around
the minimum without ever being able to reach it because we’re consistently
stepping over it. It’s a good idea then to decrease the learning rate when us-
ing SGD. Later in the book, we’ll encounter other optimization approaches
that automatically adjust the learning rate for us.


Momentum
There’s one last wrinkle in SGD we have to cover. As we saw previously, the
weight update equation for both gradient descent and SGD is

                                   w ← w – η∆w

We update the weight by the learning rate (η) times the gradient, which we
are representing here as ∆w.
    A common and powerful trick is to introduce a momentum term that
adds back some fraction of the previous ∆w, the update of the prior mini-
batch. The momentum term prevents the w parameter from changing too
quickly in response to a particular minibatch. Adding in this term gives us

                           wi+1 ← wi – η∆wi + µ∆wi–1

We’ve added subscripts to indicate the next pass through the network (i + 1),
the current pass (i), and the previous pass (i – 1). The previous pass ∆w is the
one we need to use. A typical value for µ (mu), the momentum, is around
0.9. Virtually all toolkits implement momentum in some form, including
sklearn.




                                                             Training a Neural Network   199
      Backpropagation
                   We’ve been operating under the assumption that we know the gradient
                   value for each parameter. Let’s discuss how the backpropagation algorithm
                   gives us these magic numbers. The backpropagation algorithm is perhaps
                   the single most important development in the history of neural networks as
                   it enables the training of large networks with hundreds, thousands, millions,
                   and even billions of parameters. This is especially true of the convolutional
                   networks we’ll work with in Chapter 12.
                        The backpropagation algorithm itself was published by Rumelhart, Hin-
                   ton, and Williams in 1986 in their paper “Learning Representations by Back-
                   propagating Errors.” It’s a careful application of the chain rule for deriva-
                   tives. The algorithm is called backpropagation because it works backward
                   from the output layer of the network toward the input layer, propagating
                   the error from the loss function down to each parameter of the network.
                   Colloquially, the algorithm is known as backprop; we’ll use that term here, so
                   we sound more like native machine learning experts.
                        Adding backprop into the training algorithm for gradient descent, and
                   tailoring it to SGD, gives us the algorithm in Listing 9-2.

                   1. Pick some intelligent starting values for the weights and biases.
                   2. Run a minibatch through the network using its current weights and biases
                   and calculate the average loss.
                   3. Use this loss and backprop to get the gradient for each weight and bias.
                   4. Update the weight or bias value by the step size times the gradient value.
                   5. Repeat from step 2 until the loss is low enough.

                   Listing 9-2: Stochastic gradient descent with backprop

                        Step 2 of Listing 9-2 is referred to as the forward pass; step 3 is the back-
                   ward pass. The forward pass is also how we’ll use the network after it’s finally
                   trained. The backward pass is backprop calculating the gradients for us so
                   that we can update the parameters in step 4.
                        We’ll describe backprop twice. First, we’ll do so with a simple example
                   and work with the actual derivatives. Second, we’ll work with a more ab-
                   stract notation to see how backprop applies to actual neural networks in a
                   general sense. There is no way to sugarcoat this: this section involves deriva-
                   tives, but we already have a good intuitive sense of what those are from our
                   discussion of gradient descent, so we should be in good shape to proceed.


                   Backprop, Take 1
                   Suppose we have two functions, z = f(y) and y = g(x), meaning z = f(g(x)).
                   We know that the derivative of the function g gives us dy/dx, which tells us
                   how y changes when x changes. Similarly, we know that the derivative of the
                   function f will give us dz/dy. The value of z depends upon the composition




200    Chapter 9
of f and g, meaning the output of g is the input to f, so if we want to find an
expression for dz/dx, how z changes with x, we need a way to link through
the composed functions. This is what the chain rule for derivatives gives us:
                                         dz dz dy
                                           =
                                         dx dy dx

This notation is especially nice because we can imagine the dy “term” cancel-
ing just as it would if these were actual fractions.
     How does this help us? In a neural network, the output of one layer is
the input to the next, which is composition, so we can see intuitively that
the chain rule might apply. Remember that we want the values that tell us
how the loss function changes with respect to the weights and biases. Let’s
call the loss function L and any given weight or bias w. We want to calculate
∂L/∂w for all the weights and biases.
     Alarm bells should be going off in your head. The previous paragraph
slipped in new notation. So far, we’ve been writing derivatives as dy/dx, but
the derivative for the loss with respect to a weight was written as ∂L/∂w.
What is this fancy ∂?
     When we had a function of one variable, just x, there was only one slope
at a point to talk about. As soon as we have a function with more than one
variable, the idea of the slope at a point becomes ambiguous. There are an
infinite number of lines tangent to the function at any point. So we need the
idea of the partial derivative, which is the slope of the line in the direction of
the variable we’re considering when all other variables are treated as fixed.
This tells us how the output will change as we change only the one variable.
To note that we are using a partial derivative, we shift from d to ∂, which is
just a script d.
     Let’s set up a straightforward network so that we can see how the chain
rule leads directly to the expressions we want. We’re looking at the network
in Figure 9-3, which consists of an input, two hidden layers of a single node
each, and an output layer.


  x                   h1                  h2                y
           w1                  w2                    w3
Figure 9-3: A simple network to illustrate the chain rule

For simplicity, we’ll ignore any bias values. Additionally, let’s define the ac-
tivation function to be the identity function, h(x) = x. This simplification
removes the derivative of the activation function to make things more trans-
parent.




                                                                Training a Neural Network   201
                      For this network, the forward pass computes

                                                        h1 = w1 x


                                                        h2 = w2 h1


                                                          y = w3 h2

                  which follows the form we’ve used previously, chaining things together by
                  making the output of one layer the input to the next. This gives us the out-
                  put of the network, y, for input x. If we’re looking to train the network, we’ll
                  have a training set, a set of pairs, (xi , ŷi ), i = 0, 1, . . ., that are examples of
                  what the output should be for a given input. Note that the forward pass
                  moved from the input, x, to the output, y. We’ll next see why the backward
                  pass moves from the output to the input.
                       Now let’s define the loss function, L, to be the squared error between
                  y, the network output for a given input x, and ŷ, the output we should get.
                  Functionally, the loss looks like the following.
                                                           1
                                                      L=     (y – ŷ)2
                                                           2

                  For simplicity, we’re ignoring the fact that the loss is a mean over the train-
                  ing set or some minibatch drawn from it. The factor of 12 is not strictly nec-
                  essary but it’s commonly used to make the derivative a bit nicer. Since we’re
                  looking to minimize the loss for a particular set of weights, it doesn’t matter
                  that we’re always multiplying the loss by a constant factor of 12 —the smallest
                  loss will still be the smallest loss regardless of its actual numeric value.
                       To use gradient descent, we need to find how the loss changes with the
                  weights. In this simple network, that means we need to find three gradient
                  values, one each for w1 , w2 , and w3 . This is where the chain rule comes into
                  play. We’ll write the equations first and then talk about them:

                                                 ∂L   ∂L ∂y
                                                    =
                                                 ∂w3 ∂y ∂w3


                                                 ∂L   ∂L ∂y ∂h2
                                                    =
                                                 ∂w2 ∂y ∂h2 ∂w2


                                                 ∂L   ∂L ∂y ∂h2 ∂h1
                                                    =
                                                 ∂w1 ∂y ∂h2 ∂h1 ∂w1




202   Chapter 9
    The order of these equations shows why this algorithm is called backprop-
agation. To get the partial derivative for the output layer parameter, we need
only the output and the loss, y and L. To get the partial derivative for the
middle layer weight, we need the following two partial derivatives from the
output layer:

                                       ∂L
                                       ∂y


                                      ∂y
                                      ∂h2

Finally, to get the partial derivative for the input layer weight, we need par-
tial derivatives from the output and middle layer. In effect, we have moved
backward through the network propagating values from later layers.
     For each of these equations, the right-hand side matches the left-hand
side if we imagine the “terms” canceling like fractions. Since we selected a
particularly simple form for the network, we can calculate the actual gradi-
ents by hand. We need the following gradients, from the right-hand side of
the preceding equations.

                            ∂L
                               = (y – ŷ)
                            ∂y


                            ∂y
                               = h2 = w2 h1 = w2 w1 x
                           ∂w3

                           ∂y
                               = w3
                           ∂h2


                           ∂h2
                               = h1 = w1 x
                           ∂w2


                           ∂h2
                               = w2
                           ∂h1

                           ∂h1
                               =x
                           ∂w1

The ∂L/∂y comes from the form we selected for the loss and the rules of
differentiation from calculus.



                                                         Training a Neural Network   203
                      Putting these back into the equations for the gradients of the weights
                  gives us

                                                ∂L
                                                    = (y – ŷ)w2 w1 x
                                                ∂w3

                                                ∂L
                                                    = (y – ŷ)w3 w1 x
                                                ∂w2


                                                ∂L
                                                    = (y – ŷ)w3 w2 x
                                                ∂w1

                      After a forward pass, we have numeric values for all the quantities on
                  the right-hand side of these equations. Therefore, we know the numeric
                  value of the gradients. The update rule from gradient descent then tells us
                  to change the weights like the following.

                                                    ∂L
                                      w3 ← w3 – η       = w3 – η(y – ŷ)w2 w1 x
                                                    ∂w3

                                                    ∂L
                                      w2 ← w2 – η       = w2 – η(y – ŷ)w3 w1 x
                                                    ∂w2


                                                    ∂L
                                      w1 ← w1 – η       = w1 – η(y – ŷ)w3 w2 x
                                                    ∂w1

                  where η is the learning rate parameter defining how large a step to take
                  when updating.
                      To recap, we need to use the chain rule, the heart of the backprop algo-
                  rithm, to find the gradients we need to update the weights during training.
                  For our simple network, we were able to work out the value of these gradi-
                  ents explicitly by moving backward through the network from the output
                  toward the input. Of course, this is just a toy network. Let’s now take a sec-
                  ond look at how to use backprop in a more general sense to calculate the
                  necessary gradients for any network.


                  Backprop, Take 2
                  Let’s begin by revisiting the loss function and introducing some new nota-
                  tion. The loss function is a function of all the parameters in the network,
                  meaning that every weight and bias value contributes to it. For example, the




204   Chapter 9
loss for the network of Figure 8-1, which has 20 weights and biases, could be
written as

                           (1)   (1)   (1)      (1)   (1)   (1)   (1)    (1)    (1)
               loss = L(w00 , w01 , w02 , w10 , w11 , w12 , b0 , b1 , b2 ,


                           (2)   (2)   (2)      (2)   (2)   (2)   (2)    (2)
                         w00 , w01 , w10 , w11 , w20 , w21 , b0 , b1 ,


                           (3)   (3)   (3)
                         w00 , w10 , b0 )

Note we’ve introduced a new notation for the parameters:
                                                (i)
                                               wjk

This represents the weight that links the j-th input, an output of the i – 1
layer, to the k-th node of layer i. We also have
                                                (i)
                                               bk

to represent the bias value for the k-th node of the i-th layer. Here layer 0 is
the input layer itself. The parentheses on the exponent are a label, the layer
number; they should not be interpreted as actual exponents. Therefore,
                                                (2)
                                              w20

is the weight from the third output of the first layer to the first node of the
second layer. This is the highlighted weight in Figure 9-4. Remember that we
always number nodes top to bottom, starting with 0.


   Layer 0                 1                     2                 3
                           0

          x0                                     0

Input                      1                                       y           Output

          x1                                     1

                           2
                                             w(2)20

Figure 9-4: The network of Figure 8-1 with weight w(2) 20 marked
with a bold line




                                                                        Training a Neural Network   205
                      This notation is a bit daunting, but it will let us reference any weight or
                  bias of the network precisely. The number we need to use backprop is the
                  partial derivative of the loss with respect to each weight or bias. Therefore,
                  what we want to find ultimately is written, in all its glorious mathematical
                  notation, as
                                                          ∂L
                                                               (i)
                                                        ∂wjk

                  This gives us the slope: the amount the loss will change for a change in the
                  weight linking the k-th node of the i-th layer to the j-th output of the i – 1
                  layer. A similar equation gives us the partial derivatives of the biases.
                       We can simplify this cumbersome notation by dealing only with the
                  layer number understanding that buried in the notation is a vector (biases,
                  activations) or matrix (weights) so that we want to find
                                                    ∂L      ∂L
                                                         and (i)
                                                   ∂w(i)    ∂b

                  These correspond to a matrix for all the weights linking layer i – 1 to i, and a
                  vector for all the biases of layer i, respectively.
                       We’ll protect our notational sanity by looking at things in terms of vec-
                  tors and matrices. Let’s start with the output layer and see what that buys us.
                  We know that the activations of the output layer, layer L, are found via

                                             a(L) = h(W(L) a(L–1) + b(L) )

                  with a being the activations from layer L – 1, b the bias vector for layer L, and
                  W the weight matrix between layers L – 1 and L. The activation function is h.
                      Additionally, we’ll define the argument to h to be z(L)

                                              z(L) ≡ W(L) a(L–1) + b(L)

                  and call ∂L/∂z(l) the error, the contribution to the loss from the inputs to
                  layer l. Next, we define
                                                               ∂L
                                                     δ (l) ≡
                                                               ∂z(l)

                  so that we can work with δ (delta) from now on.




206   Chapter 9
           For the output layer, we can write δ as
                                              ∂L     ∂L
                                   δ (L) =     (L)
                                                   = (L) · h′ (z(L) )
                                             ∂z     ∂a

       The notation h′ (z(L) ) is another way to write the derivative of h (with respect
       to z) evaluated at z(L) . The · represents elementwise multiplication. This is
       the way NumPy works when multiplying two arrays of the same size so that if
       C = A · B, then Cij = Aij Bij . Technically, this product is called the Hadamard
       product, named for the French mathematician Jacques Hadamard.
            The preceding means that to use backpropagation, we need a loss func-
       tion that can be differentiated—a loss function for which a derivative exists
       at every point. This isn’t too much of a burden; the loss functions we’ll ex-
       amine in the next section meet this criterion. We also need an activation
       function that can be differentiated so we can find h′ (z). Again, the activation
       functions we have considered so far are essentially all differentiable.

NOTE   I say “essentially” because the derivative of the ReLU is undefined at x = 0. The
       derivative from the left is 0 while the derivative from the right is 1. In practice, im-
       plementations choose a particular value to return should the argument to the deriva-
       tive of the ReLU be exactly 0. For example, TensorFlow simply asks if the argument
       is less than or equal to 0 and, if it is, returns 0 as the derivative. Otherwise, it re-
       turns 1. This works because, numerically, there is so much rounding off happening
       to floating-point values during calculations that it’s unlikely the value passed to the
       derivative of the ReLU function was actually meant to be identically 0.
           The equation for δ tells us the error due to the inputs to a particular lay-
       er. We’ll see next how to use this to get the error from each weight of a layer.
           With δ (L) in hand, we can propagate the error down to the next layer via

                                   δ (l) = ((W(l+1) )T δ l+1 ) · h′ (z(l) )

       where, for the next-to-last layer, l + 1 = L. The T represents matrix transpose.
       This is a standard matrix operation that involves a reflection across the diag-
       onal so that if
                                                      
                                               1 2 3
                                        A = 4 5 6
                                               7 8 9

       then
                                                       
                                                   1 4 7
                                             AT = 2 5 8
                                                   3 6 9




                                                                              Training a Neural Network   207
                        We need the transpose of the weight matrix because we are going in the
                   opposite direction from the forward pass. If there are three nodes in layer
                   l and two in layer l + 1, then the weight matrix between them, W, is a 2 × 3
                   matrix, so Wx is a two-element vector. In backprop, we are going from layer
                   l + 1 to layer l, so we transpose the weight matrix to map the two-element
                   vector, here δ, to a three-element vector for layer l.
                        The δ (l) equation is used for every layer moving backward through the
                   network. The output layer values are given by δ (L) , which starts the process.
                        Once we have the errors per layer, we can finally find the gradient values
                   we need. For the biases, the values are the elements of δ for that layer
                                                       ∂L           (l)
                                                        (l)
                                                               = δj
                                                      ∂bj

                   for the j-th element of the bias for the l-th layer. For the weights, we need
                                                    ∂L          (l–1) (l)
                                                       (l)
                                                             = ak    δj
                                                    ∂wkj

                   linking the k-th output of the previous layer to the j-th error for the current
                   layer, l.
                        Using the preceding equations for each layer of the network gives us the
                   set of weight and bias gradient values needed to continue applying gradient
                   descent.
                        As I hope you can see from this rather dense section, we can use a con-
                   venient mathematical definition of the error to set up an iterative process
                   that moves the error from the output of the network back through the lay-
                   ers of the network to the input layer. We cannot calculate the errors for a
                   layer without already knowing the errors for the layer after it, so we end
                   up propagating the error backward through the network, hence the name
                   backpropagation.


      Loss Functions
                   The loss function is used during training to measure how poorly the network
                   is doing. The goal of training is to make this value as small as possible, while
                   still generalizing to the true characteristics of the data. In theory, we can cre-
                   ate any loss function we want if we feel it’s relevant to the problem at hand.
                   If you read the deep learning literature, you’ll see papers do this all the time.
                   Still, most research falls back on a few standard loss functions that, empiri-
                   cally, do a good job most of the time. We’ll discuss three of those here: ab-
                   solute loss (sometimes called L1 loss), mean squared error (sometimes called
                   L2 loss), and cross-entropy loss.




208    Chapter 9
Absolute and Mean Squared Error Loss
Let’s start with the absolute and mean squared error loss functions. We’ll
discuss them together because they’re very similar mathematically.
    We’ve seen mean squared error already in our discussion of backprop.
Absolute loss is new. Mathematically, the two equations are

                                    Labs = |y – ŷ|


                                            1
                                LMSE =        (y – ŷ)2
                                            2

where we’ve labeled them abs for absolute value and MSE for mean squared
error, respectively. Note that we’ll always use y for the network output, the
output from the forward pass with input x. We’ll always use ŷ for the known
training class label, which is always an integer label starting with 0.
     Even though we’re writing the loss functions in a simple form, we need
to remember that when used, the value is really the mean of the loss over
the training set or minibatch. This is also the origin of mean in mean squared
error. Therefore, we really should be writing this:

                           1 ∑1                 1 ∑
                              N                           N
                  LMSE =        (yi – ŷi )2 =     (yi – ŷi )2
                           N  2                2N
                              i=1                         i=1

Here we’re finding the average of the squared error loss over the N values in
the training set (or minibatch).
     Both of these loss functions are reasonable if we consider what they
are measuring. We want the network to output a value that matches the
expected value, the sample label. The difference between these two is an
indication of how wrong the network output is. For the absolute loss, we
find the difference and drop the sign, which is what the absolute value does.
For the MSE loss, we find the difference and then square it. This also makes
the difference positive because multiplying a negative number by itself al-
ways results in a positive number. As mentioned in the ”Backpropagation”
section on page 200, the 12 factor on the MSE loss simplifies the derivative of
the loss function but does not change how it works.
     The absolute loss and MSE are different, however. The MSE is more
sensitive to outliers. This is because we’re squaring the difference, and a
plot of y = x2 grows quickly as x, the difference, gets larger. For the abso-
lute loss, this effect is minimized because there is no squaring; the difference
is merely the difference.
     In truth, neither of these loss functions are commonly used for neural
networks when the goal of the network is classification, which is our implicit




                                                                Training a Neural Network   209
                  assumption in this book. It’s more common to use the cross-entropy loss,
                  presented next. We want the network output to lead to the correct class la-
                  bel for the input. However, it’s entirely possible to train a network to output
                  a continuous real value instead. This is called regression, and both of these
                  loss functions are quite useful in that context.


                  Cross-Entropy Loss
                  Even though we can use the absolute and MSE loss functions in training a
                  neural network for classification, the most commonly used loss is the cross-
                  entropy loss (closely related to the log-loss). This loss function assumes the
                  output of the network is a softmax (vector) for the multiclass case or a sig-
                  moid (logistic, scalar) for the binary case. Mathematically, it looks like this
                  for M classes in the multiclass case:

                                             ∑
                                             M
                                  Lent = –       ŷj log yj (multiclass case)
                                             i


                                  Lent = –ŷ log(y) + (1 – ŷ) log(1 – y) (binary case)

                  What is the cross-entropy doing that often makes it a better choice for train-
                  ing a neural network for classification? Let’s think about the multiclass case
                  with softmax outputs. The definition of softmax means that the network out-
                  puts can be thought of as probability estimates of the likelihood that the in-
                  put represents each of the possible classes. If we have three classes, we might
                  get a softmax output that looks like this:

                                                  y = (0.03, 0.87, 0.10)

                  This output roughly means that the network thinks there is a 3 percent
                  chance the input is of class 0, an 87 percent chance it is of class 1, and a 10
                  percent chance it is of class 2. This is the output vector, y. We compute the
                  loss by supplying the actual label via a vector where 0 means not this class and
                  1 means this class. So, the ŷ vector associated with the input that led to this y
                  would be

                                                       ŷ = (0, 1, 0)

                  for an overall loss value of

                            Lent = –(0(log 0.03) + 1(log 0.87) + 0(log 0.10)) = 0.139262

                       The three predictions of the network can be thought of together as a
                  probability distribution, just like the one we get when we sum together the
                  likelihoods of different outcomes for throwing two dice. We also have a
                  known probability distribution from the class label. For the preceding ex-
                  ample, the actual class is class 1, so we made a probability distribution that

210   Chapter 9
         assigns no chance to classes 0 and 2, and 100 percent probability to class 1,
         the actual class. As the network trains, we expect the output distribution to
         be closer and closer to (0, 1, 0), the distribution for the label.
              Minimizing the cross-entropy drives the network toward better and bet-
         ter predictions of the probability distribution for the different classes we
         want the network to learn about. Ideally, these output distributions will look
         like the training labels: 0 for all classes except the actual class, which has an
         output of 1.
              For classification tasks, we usually use the cross-entropy loss. The sklearn
         MLPClassifier class uses cross-entropy. Keras supports cross-entropy loss as
         well, but provides many others, including absolute and mean squared error.


Weight Initialization
         Before we can train a neural network, we need to initialize the weights and
         biases. Step 1 of Listing 9-1 on gradient descent says to “Pick some intelli-
         gent starting values for the weights and biases.”
              The initialization techniques examined here all depend upon selecting
         random numbers in some range. More than that, the random numbers
         need to be either uniform over that range or normally distributed. Uni-
         formly distributed means that all the values in the range are equally likely to
         be selected. This is what you get for each number, 1 through 6, if you roll
         a fair die many times over. Normally distributed values were introduced in
         Chapter 4. These are values with a particular mean, the most likely value re-
         turned, and a range around the mean over which the likelihood of a value
         being selected falls off gradually toward 0 according to a parameter known
         as the standard deviation. This is the classic bell curve shape. Either distri-
         bution can be used. The main point is that the initial weights are not all the
         same value (like 0) because if they are, all gradients will be the same during
         backprop, and each weight will change in the same way. The initial weights
         need to be different to break this symmetry and allow individual weights to
         adapt themselves to the training data.
              In the early days of neural networks, people initialized the weights and
         biases by choosing values in [0, 1) uniformly (U(0, 1)) or by drawing them
         from the standard normal distribution, N(0, 1), with a mean of 0 and a stan-
         dard deviation of 1. These values were often multiplied by some small con-
         stant, like 0.01. In many cases, this approach works, at least for simple net-
         works. However, as networks became more complex, this simple approach
         fell apart. Networks initialized in this way had trouble learning, and many
         failed to learn at all.
              Let’s fast-forward several decades and a great deal of research later. Re-
         searchers realized that precisely how the weights of a particular layer should
         be initialized depended primarily on a few things: the type of activation
         function used and the number of weights coming into the layer (fin ) and,
         possibly, going out (fout ). These realizations led to the main initialization ap-
         proaches in use today.



                                                                    Training a Neural Network   211
                      The sklearn MLPClassifier class uses Glorot initialization. This is also
                  sometimes called Xavier initialization, though some toolkits mean some-
                  thing different when they use that term.1 (Note Xavier and Glorot actually
                  refer to the same person.) Let’s see how sklearn uses Glorot initialization.
                  The key method in MLPClassifier for initializing the weights is _init_coef.
                  This method uses a uniform distribution and sets the range for it so that the
                  weights are in
                                           [ √                 √            ]
                                                      A              A
                                             –               ,
                                                  fin + fout     fin + fout

                  where the bracket notation indicates the smallest possible value selected
                  (left) to the largest possible value (right). As the distribution is uniform, ev-
                  ery value in that range is equally likely to be selected.
                       We did not yet specify what A is. This value depends upon the activation
                  function used. According to the literature, if the activation function is a sig-
                  moid (logistic), then A = 2 is suggested. Otherwise, A = 6 is recommended.
                       Now to confuse things. Some toolkits, like Caffe, use an alternate form
                  of Xavier initialization by which they mean a multiplier on samples from
                  a standard normal distribution. In that case, we initialize the weights with
                  draws from
                                             √
                                                1
                                     N(0, 1)       (alternate Xavier initialization)
                                               fin

                      To add even more confusion, the introduction of the rectified linear
                  unit (ReLU) resulted in a further recommended change. This is known now
                  as He initialization and it replaces the 1 in Xavier initialization with a 2:
                                             √
                                                2
                                     N(0, 1)       (He initialization, ReLU only)
                                               fin

                  For more on this, see “Delving Deep into Rectifiers: Surpassing Human-
                  Level Performance on ImageNet Classification” by Kaiming He et al.
                       The key point with these initialization schemes is that the old-school
                  “small random value” is replaced by a more principled set of values that take
                  the network architecture into account via fin and fout .
                       The preceding discussion ignored bias values. This was intentional.
                  While it might be okay to initialize the bias values instead of leaving them
                  all 0, prevailing wisdom, which is fickle and fluid, currently says it’s best to
                  initialize them all to 0. That said, sklearn MLPClassifier initializes the bias val-
                  ues in the same way as the weights.


                  1. For more on these, see Glorot, Xavier, and Yoshua Bengio. “Understanding the Difficulty of
                  Training Deep Feedforward Neural Networks.”



212   Chapter 9
Overfitting and Regularization
        The goal of training a model is for it to learn essential, general features of
        the parent distribution the dataset is sampled from. That way, when the
        model encounters new inputs, it’s prepared to interpret them correctly. As
        we’ve seen in this chapter, the primary method for training a neural network
        involves optimization—looking for the “best” set of parameters so that the
        network makes as few errors as possible on the training set.
             However, it’s not enough to simply look for the best set of values that
        minimizes the training error. If we make no mistakes when classifying the
        training data, it’s often the case that we’ve overfitted and haven’t actually
        learned general features of the data. This is more likely the situation with
        traditional models, neural network or classical, and less so with deep models
        like the convolutional networks of Chapter 12.


        Understanding Overfitting
        We’ve mentioned overfitting from time to time before now but have not
        gained any good intuition as to what it is. One way to think of overfitting
        is to consider a separate problem, the problem of fitting a function to a set
        of points. This is known as curve fitting, and one approach to it is to optimize
        some measure of error over the points by finding parameters to the function
        that minimize the error. This should sound familiar. It’s exactly what we do
        when training a neural network.
             As an example of curve fitting, consider the following points:

                                         x      y

                                         0.00   50.0
                                         0.61   --17.8
                                         1.22   74.1
                                         1.83   29.9
                                         2.44   114.8
                                         3.06   55.3
                                         3.67   66.0
                                         4.28   89.1
                                         4.89   128.3
                                         5.51   180.8
                                         6.12   229.7
                                         6.73   229.3
                                         7.34   227.7
                                         7.95   354.9
                                         8.57   477.1
                                         9.18   435.4
                                         9.79   470.1


        We want to find a function, y = f(x), that describes these points—a function
        that might have been the parent function these points were measured from,
        albeit noisily.
              Typically, when curve fitting, we already know the form of the function;
        it’s the parameters we’re looking for. But what if we didn’t know the exact

                                                                 Training a Neural Network   213
                  form of the function, only that it was some kind of polynomial? In general, a
                  polynomial looks like this for some maximum exponent, n:

                                          y = a0 + a1 x + a2 x2 + a3 x3 + · · · + an xn

                  The goal of fitting a polynomial to a dataset is to find the parameters,
                  a0 , a1 , a2 , . . . , an . The method for doing this usually minimizes the squared
                  difference between y, a given output for a given x position, and f(x), the func-
                  tion output at the same x for the current set of parameters. This should
                  sound very familiar, as we discussed using precisely this type of loss function
                  for training a neural network.
                        How does this relate to overfitting? Let’s plot the previous dataset, along
                  with the result of fitting two different functions to it. The first function is

                                                     y = a0 + a1 x + a2 x2

                  which is a quadratic function, the type of function you may have learned to
                  hate as a beginning algebra student. The second function is

                                    y = a0 + a1 x + a2 x2 + a3 x3 + · · · + a14 x14 + a15 x15

                  which is a 15th-degree polynomial. The results are shown in Figure 9-5.

                  500




                  400




                  300




                  200




                  100




                    0


                        1       2          3         4          5            6            7     8   9

                  Figure 9-5: A dataset and two functions fit to it: a quadratic (dashed)
                  and a 15th-degree polynomial (solid)




214   Chapter 9
     Which function does a better job of capturing the general trend of the
dataset? The quadratic clearly follows the general trend of the data, while
the 15th-degree polynomial is all over the place. Look again at Figure 9-5.
If all we use to decide that we have fit the data well is the distance between
the data points and the corresponding function value, we’d say that the
15th-degree polynomial is the better fit; it passes through nearly all the data
points, after all. This is analogous to training a neural network and achiev-
ing perfection on the training set. The cost of that perfection might well be
a poor ability to generalize to new inputs. The quadratic fit of Figure 9-5 did
not hit the data points, but it did capture the general trend of the data, mak-
ing it more useful should we want to make predictions about the y values
we’d expect to get for a new x value.
     When a human wants to fit a curve to something like our sample dataset,
they usually look at the data and, noticing the general trend, select the func-
tion to fit. It might also be the case that the expected functional form is al-
ready known from theory. If we want to be analogous to neural networks,
however, we’ll find ourselves in a situation where we don’t know the proper
function to fit, and need to find a “best” one from the space of functions of
x along with its parameters.
     Hopefully, this example drives home the idea that training a neural net-
work is not an optimization problem like other optimization problems—we
need something to push the function the network is learning in a direction
that captures the essence of the data without falling into the trap of paying
too much attention to specific features of the training data. That something
is regularization, and you need it, especially for large networks that have a
huge capacity.


Understanding Regularization
Regularization is anything that pushes the network to learn the relevant fea-
tures of the parent distribution and not the details of the training set. The
best form of regularization is increasing the size and representative nature of
the training set. The larger the dataset and the better it represents all the
types of samples the network will encounter in the wild, the better it will
learn. Of course, we’re typically forced to work with a finite training set. The
machine learning community has spent, and is spending, untold time and
energy learning how to get more from smaller datasets.
     In Chapter 5, we encountered perhaps the second-best way to regular-
ize a model, data augmentation. This is a proxy for having a larger dataset,
where we use the data we do have to generate new training samples that are
plausibly from the parent distribution. For example, we considered increas-
ing a limited set of training images by simple rotations, flips, and shifts of
the images already in the training set. Data augmentation is powerful, and
you should use it when possible. It’s particularly easy to apply when working
with images as inputs, though in Chapter 5 we also saw a way to augment a
dataset consisting of continuously valued vectors.
     We now have two tricks in our regularization toolbox: more data and
data augmentation. These are the best tricks to know, but there others that

                                                         Training a Neural Network   215
                  you should use when available. Let’s look at two more: L2 regularization
                  and dropout. The former is now standard and widely supported by the tool-
                  kits, including sklearn and Keras. The latter is powerful and was a game
                  changer when it appeared in 2012.


                  L2 Regularization
                  A model with a few weights that have large values is somehow less simple
                  than a model that has smaller weights. Therefore, keeping the weights small
                  will hopefully allow the network to implement a simpler function better
                  suited to the task we want it to learn.
                       We can encourage the weights to be small by using L2 regularization.
                  L2 regularization adds a term to the loss function so that the loss becomes
                                                                  λ∑ 2
                                            L = L(x, y, w, b) +     wi
                                                                  2
                                                                   i

                  where the first term is whatever loss we’re already using, and the second
                  term is the new L2 regularization term. Notice that the loss is a function of
                  the input (x), the label (y), the weights (w), and the biases (b), where we mean
                  all the weights and all the biases of the network. The regularization term is a
                  sum over all the weights in the network and only the weights. The “L2” label
                  is what causes us to square the weights.
                       Here L2 refers to the type of norm or distance. You might be familiar
                  with the equation for the distance between two points on the plane: d2 =
                  (x2 – x1 )2 + (y2 – y1 )2 . This is the Euclidean distance, also known as the L2
                  distance, because the values are squared. This is why the regularization term
                  is called L2 and the weight values are squared. It’s also possible to use an
                  L1 loss term, where instead of squaring the weights, one uses the absolute
                  value. In practice, L2 regularization is more common and, at least empiri-
                  cally, seems to work better for neural network classifiers.
                       The λ (lambda) multiplier sets the importance of this term; the larger it
                  is, the more it dominates the overall loss used to train the network. Typical
                  values of λ are around 0.0005. We’ll see in a little bit why the multiplier is
                  λ/2 and not just λ.
                       What is the L2 term doing? Recall that the loss is the thing we want to
                  minimize while training. The new L2 term sums the squares of the weights
                  of the network. If weights are large, the loss is large, and that’s something
                  we don’t want while training. Smaller weights make the L2 term smaller, so
                  gradient descent will favor small weights, whether they are positive or neg-
                  ative, since we square the weight value. If all the weights of the network are
                  relatively small, and none strongly dominate, then the network will use all of
                  the weights to represent the data, and this is a good thing when it comes to
                  preventing overfitting.
                       L2 regularization is also known as weight decay because of what the L2
                  term does during backprop. Backprop gives us the partial derivative of the
                  loss function with respect to wi . Adding L2 regularization means that the
                  partial derivative of the total loss now adds in the partial derivative of the

216   Chapter 9
L2 term itself with respect to any particular weight, wi . The derivative of
λ w2 is λw; the 1 cancels the factor of 2 that would otherwise be there. Also,
2               2
since we want the partial derivative with respect to a specific weight, wi , all
the other parts of the L2 term go to 0. The net effect is that the update for
weight wi during gradient descent becomes
                                          ∂L
                            wi ← wi – η       – ηλwi
                                          ∂wi

where η (eta) is the learning rate, and we are ignoring any additional mo-
mentum term. The ηλwi term is new. It is due to L2 regularization, and we
can see that it’s pushing the weights toward 0 as training progresses because
both η and λ are < 1, so on each minibatch, we’re subtracting some small
fraction of the weight value. The weight can still increase, but to do so, the
gradient of the original loss must be large.
    We previously stated that the form of the loss function is up to us, the
developer of the network. A regularization term isn’t the only kind of term
we can add to the loss function. As we did with the L2 term, we can create
and add terms to change the behavior of the network during training and
help it learn what we want it to learn. This is a powerful technique that can
be used to customize various aspects of what a neural network learns.


Dropout
Dropout took the machine learning community by storm when it appeared
in 2012, see “Imagenet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Net-
works” by Alex Krizhevsky et al. As of Fall 2020, this paper has been cited
over 70,000 times, and as one well-known machine learning researcher told
me privately at the time, “If we had had dropout in the 1980s, this would be
a different world now.” So, what is dropout, and why was everyone so ex-
cited by it?
     To answer that question, we need to review the concept of ensembles of
models. We talked about them a bit in Chapter 6. An ensemble is a group of
models, all slightly different and all trained on the same dataset or a slightly
different version of the dataset. The idea is straightforward: since training
most models involves randomness, training multiple similar models should
result in a set that is mutually reinforcing—one where the set of outputs can
be combined to produce a result that is better than any one model alone.
Ensembles are useful, and we use them often, but they come at a price in
terms of runtime. If it takes x milliseconds to run a sample through a neural
network, and we have an ensemble of 20 networks, then our evaluation time
(inference time) has jumped to 20x milliseconds, ignoring the possibility of
parallel execution. In some situations, that is unacceptable (to say nothing
of the storage and power requirements for 20 big networks versus 1). Since
the net result of an ensemble of models is better overall performance, we
can say that an ensemble is a kind of regularizer as well since it embodies the
“wisdom of the crowd.”


                                                         Training a Neural Network   217
                       Dropout takes the ensemble idea to an extreme but does so only during
                  training and without creating a second network so that in the end, we still
                  have one model to deal with. Like many good ideas in statistics, this one re-
                  quires randomness. Right now, when we train the network, we do a forward
                  pass using the current weights and biases. What if, during that forward pass,
                  we randomly assign a 0 or a 1 to each node of the network so that nodes
                  with a 1 are used in the next layer while nodes with a 0 are dropped out?
                  We’d effectively be running the training samples through a different neural
                  network configuration each time. For example, see Figure 9-6.

                               1                                             0
                   x0                      1                     x0                      1
                               0                       y                     1               y
                   x1                      1                     x1                      1
                               0                                             1

                               0                                             1
                   x0                      0                     x0                      1
                               1                       y                     0               y
                   x1                      1                     x1                      0
                               0                                             1
                  Figure 9-6: Possible networks used when applying dropout during training

                       Here we show the network of Figure 8-1 but with a 0 or 1 for each of the
                  hidden nodes. This 0 or 1 determines whether the output is used or not.
                  The heavy lines in the network show the connections that are still valid. In
                  other words, the heavy lines show the network that was actually used to cre-
                  ate the output accumulated for backprop. If we do this for each training
                  sample, we can readily see that we’ll be training a vast number of neural net-
                  works, each trained on a single sample. Moreover, since the weights and bi-
                  ases persist between forward passes, all the networks will share those weights
                  in the hope that the process will reinforce good weight values that represent
                  the essence of the dataset. As we’ve mentioned several times in this chapter,
                  learning the essence of the data is the goal of training; we want to generalize
                  well to new data from the same virtual parent distribution that generated the
                  training set in the first place. Dropout is serious regularization.
                       I previously said that we “randomly assign a 0 or a 1” to the nodes. Do
                  we assign them equally? The probability with which we drop nodes in a layer
                  is something we get to specify. Let’s call it p. Typically, p = 0.5, meaning
                  about 50 percent of the nodes in a layer will be dropped for each training
                  sample. Setting p = 0.8 would drop 80 percent of the nodes, while p = 0.1
                  would drop only 10 percent. Sometimes a different probability is used for

218   Chapter 9
      different layers of the network, especially the first input layer, which should
      use a smaller probability than the hidden nodes. If we drop too many of the
      inputs, we’ll lose the source of the signal we’re trying to get the network to
      recognize. Dropout applied to the input layer can be thought of as a form of
      data augmentation.
           Conceptually, dropout is training a large set of networks that share
      weights. The output of each of these networks can be combined with the
      others via a geometric mean, assuming we use a softmax output. The geo-
      metric mean of two numbers is the square root of their product. The ge-
      ometric mean of n numbers is the nth root of their product. In the case
      of dropout, it turns out that this can be approximated by using the entire
      network with all the weights multiplied by the probability that they would
      be included. Given we said p is the probability that a node is dropped, the
      weights need to be multiplied by 1 – p, as that is the probability the node
      would not be dropped. So, if we fix p = 0.5 and use it for all the nodes, then
      the final network is the one where all the weights are divided by 2.
           As of this writing, sklearn’s MLPClassifier class does not support dropout,
      but Keras most certainly does, so we’ll see dropout again in Chapter 12.


Summary
      Because this is an important chapter, let’s review what we’ve learned in a lit-
      tle more depth. In this chapter, we described how to train a neural network
      using gradient descent and backpropagation. The overall sequence of steps
      is as follows:
          1.   Select the architecture of the model. This means the number of lay-
               ers, their sizes, and the type of activation function.
          2.   Initialize the weights and biases of the network using intelligently
               selected initial values.
          3.   Run a minibatch of training samples through the network and com-
               pute the mean loss over the minibatch. We discussed common loss
               functions.
          4.   Using backpropagation, calculate the contribution of each weight
               and bias to the overall loss for the minibatch.
          5.   Using gradient descent, update the weight and bias values of the
               model based on the contributions found via backpropagation. We
               discussed stochastic gradient descent and its relationship to the con-
               cept of minibatches.
          6.   Repeat from step 3 until the desired number of epochs or mini-
               batches have been processed, or the loss has dropped below some
               threshold, or stopped changing much, or when the score on a vali-
               dation set of samples has reached its minimum value.
          7.   If the network isn’t learning well, apply regularization and train
               again. We looked at L2 regularization and dropout in this chapter.
               Data augmentation, or increasing the size or representativeness of
               the training set, can also be thought of as regularization.


                                                               Training a Neural Network   219
                      The goal of training a neural network is to learn the parameters of a
                  model that generalizes well to unseen inputs. This is the goal of all super-
                  vised machine learning. For a neural network, we know it’s able to approxi-
                  mate any function, with enough capacity and enough training data. Naïvely,
                  we may think that we are doing nothing more than ordinary optimization,
                  but, in an important sense, we are not. Perfection on the training set is of-
                  ten not a good thing; it’s often a sign of overfitting. Instead, we want the
                  model to learn a function that captures the essential nature of the function
                  implied by the training set. We use the test data to give us confidence that
                  we’ve learned a useful function.
                      In the next chapter, we’ll get real and explore traditional neural net-
                  works through a series of experiments using sklearn.




220   Chapter 9
